The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mae Madden, by Mary Murdoch Mason

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Mae Madden

Author: Mary Murdoch Mason

Release Date: May 12, 2006 [EBook #1829]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAE MADDEN ***




Produced by Donald Lainson





MAE MADDEN

By Mary Murdoch Mason


With an introductory poem, by Joaquin Miller.

     The wheel of fortune guide you,
     The boy with the bow beside you
     Run aye in the way, till the dawn of day
     And a luckier lot betide you.

     Ben Jonson.




A DREAM OF ITALY.

AN ALLEGORY INTRODUCING "MAE MADDEN."

     I.

     We two had been parted, God pity us, when
     The stars were unnamed and when heaven was dim;
     We two had been parted far back on the rim
     And the outermost border of heaven's red bars:
     We two had been parted ere the meeting of men
     Or God had set compass on spaces as yet.
     We two had been parted ere God had set
     His finger to spinning the spaces with stars,--
     And now, at the last in the gold and set
     Of the sun of Venice, we two had met.

     II.

     Where the lion of Venice, with brows afrown,
     With tossed mane tumbled, and teeth in air,
     Looks out in his watch o'er the watery town,
     With a paw half lifted, with his claws half bare,
     By the blue Adriatic, in the edge of the sea,
     I saw her.  I knew her, but she knew not me.
     I had found her at last!  Why, I had sailed
     The antipodes through, had sought, had hailed
     All flags, had climbed where the storm clouds curled,
     And called from the awful arched dome of the world.

     III.

     I saw her one moment, then fell back abashed
     And filled full to the throat. . . .  Then I turned me once more
     So glad to the sea, while the level sun flashed
     On the far, snowy Alps. . . .  Her breast!  Why, her breast
     Was white as twin pillows that allure you to rest;
     Her sloping limbs moved like to melodies, told
     As she rose from the sea, and she threw back the gold
     Of her glory of hair, and set face to the shore. . . .
     I knew her!  I knew her, though we had not met
     Since the far stars sang to the sun's first set.

     IV.

     How long I had sought her!  I had hungered, nor ate
     Of any sweet fruits.  I had tasted not one
     Of all the fair glories grown under the sun.
     I had sought only her.  Yea, I knew that she
     Had come upon earth and stood waiting for me
     Somewhere by my way.  But the path ways of fate
     They had led otherwhere.  The round world round,
     The far North seas and the near profound
     Had failed me for aye.  Now I stood by that sea
     While a ship drove by, and all dreamily.

     V.

     I had turned from the lion a time, and when
     I looked tow'rd the tide and out on the lea
     Of the town where the warm sea tumbled and teemed
     With beauty, I saw her.  I knew her then,
     The tallest, the fairest fair daughter of men.
     O, Venice stood full in her glory.  She gleamed
     In the splendor of sunset and sensuous sea;
     Yet I saw but my bride, my affinity,
     While the doves hurried home to the dome of Saint Mark
     And the brass horses plunged their high manes in the dark,

     VI.

     Was it well with my love?  Was she true?  Was she brave
     With virtue's own valor?  Was she waiting for me?
     O, how fared my love!  Had she home?  Had she bread?
     Had she known but the touch of the warm-tempered wave?
     Was she born upon earth with a crown on her head;
     Or born like myself, but a dreamer, instead?
     So long it had been!  So long!  Why the sea,
     That wrinkled and surly old time-tempered slave,
     Had been born, had his revels, grown wrinkled and hoar
     Since I last saw my love on that uttermost shore.

     VII.

     O, how fared my love?  Once I lifted my face
     And I shook back my hair and looked out on the sea;
     I pressed my hot palms as I stood in my place
     And cried, "O, I come like a king to your side
     Though all hell intervene." . . .  "Hist! she may be a bride!
     A mother at peace, with sweet babes on her knee!
     A babe at her breast and a spouse at her side! . . .
     Have I wandered too long, and has destiny
     Set mortal between us?"  I buried my face
     In my hands, and I moaned as I stood in my place.

     VIII.

     'Twas her year to be young.  She was tall, she was fair
     Was she pure as the snow on the Alps over there?
     'Twas her year to be young.  She was fair, she was tall
     And I knew she was true as I lifted my face
     And saw her press down her rich robe to its place
     With a hand white and small as a babe's with a doll,
     And her feet--why, her feet, in the white shining sand,
     Were so small they might nest in my one brawny hand.
     Then she pushed back her hair with a round hand that shone
     And flashed in the light with a white starry stone.

     IX.

     Then, my love she was rich.  My love she was fair.
     Was she pure as the snow on the Alps over there?
     She was gorgeous with wealth, "Thank God, she has bread,"
     I said to myself.  Then I humbled my head
     In gratitude.  Then I questioned me where
     Was her palace? her parents?  What name did she bear?
     What mortal on earth came nearest her heart?
     Who touched the small hand till it thrilled to a smart?
     'Twas her day to be young.  She was proud, she was fair.
     Was she pure as the snow on the Alps over there?

     X.

     Now she turned, reached a hand; then a tall gondolier
     That had leaned on his oar, like a long lifted spear,
     Shot sudden and swift and all silently
     And drew to her side as she turned from the tide. . .
     It was odd, such a thing, and I counted it queer
     That a princess like this, whether virgin or bride,
     Should abide thus apart, and should bathe in that sea;
     And I shook back my hair, and so unsatisfied.
     Then I fluttered the doves that were perched close about,
     As I strode up and down in dismay and in doubt.

     XI.

     Then she stood in the boat on the borders of night
     As a goddess might stand on that far wonder land
     Of eternal sweet life, which men have named Death.
     I turned to the sea and I caught at my breath,
     As she drew from the boat through her white baby hand
     Her vestment of purple imperial, and white.
     Then the gondola shot! swift, sharp from the shore.
     There was never the sound of a song or of oar
     But the doves hurried home in white clouds to Saint Mark,
     And the lion loomed high o'er the sea in the dark.

     XII.

     Then I cried, "Quick!  Follow her.  Follow her.  Fast!
     Come!  Thrice double fare if you follow her true
     To her own palace door."  There was plashing of oar
     And rattle of rowlock. . . .  I sat leaning low
     Looking far in the dark, looking out as we sped
     With my soul all alert, bending down, leaning low.
     But only the oaths of the men as we passed
     When we jostled them sharp as we sudden shot thro'
     The watery town.  Then a deep, distant roar--
     The rattle of rowlock, the rush of the oar.

     XIII.

     Then an oath.  Then a prayer!  Then a gust that made rents
     Through the yellow sailed fishers.  Then suddenly
     Came sharp forked fire!  Then far thunder fell
     Like the great first gun!  Ah, then there was route
     Of ships like the breaking of regiments
     And shouts as if hurled from an upper hell.
     Then tempest!  It lifted, it spun us about,
     Then shot us ahead through the hills of the sea
     As if a great arrow shot shoreward in wars--
     Then heaven split open till we saw the blown stars.

     XIV.

     On!  On!  Through the foam, through the storm, through the town,
     She was gone.  She was lost in the wilderness
     Of palaces lifting their marbles of snow.
     I stood in my gondola.  Up and all down
     I pushed through the surge of the salt-flood street
     Above me, below. . .  Twas only the beat
     Of the sea's sad heart. . .  Then I heard below
     The water-rat building, but nothing but that;
     Not even the sea bird screaming distress,
     As she lost her way in that wilderness.

     XV.

     I listened all night.  I caught at each sound;
     I clutched and I caught as a man that drown'd. . . .
     Only the sullen low growl of the sea
     Far out the flood street at the edge of the ships.
     Only the billow slow licking his lips,
     Like a dog that lay crouching there watching for me;
     Growling and showing white teeth all the night,
     Reaching his neck and as ready to bite--
     Only the waves with their salt flood tears
     Fawning white stones of a thousand years.

     XVI.

     Only the birds in the wilderness
     Of column and dome and of glittering spire
     That thrust to heaven and held the fire
     Of the thunder still:  The bird's distress
     As he struck his wings in that wilderness,
     On marbles that speak and thrill and inspire. . .
     The night below and the night above;
     The water-rat building, the startled white dove,
     The wide-winged, dolorous sea bird's call
     The water-rat building, but that was all.

     XVII.

     Lo! pushing the darkness from pillar to post,
     The morning came silent and gray like a ghost
     Slow up the canal.  I leaned from the prow
     And listened.  Not even the bird in distress
     Screaming above through the wilderness;
     Not even the stealthy old water-rat now.
     Only the bell in the fisherman's tower
     Slow tolling a-sea and telling the hour
     To kneel to their sweet Santa Barbara
     For tawny fishers a-sea and pray.

     *     *     *     *     *     *

     XVIII.

     My dream it is ended, the curtain withdrawn.
     The night that lay hard on the breast of earth,
     Deep and heavy as a horrid nightmare,
     Moves by, and I look to the rosy dawn. . . . .
     I shall leave you here, with a leader fair;
     One gentle, with faith and fear of her worth.
     She shall lead you on through that Italy
     That the gods have loved; and may it be
     A light-hearted hour that, hand in hand,
     You wander the warm and the careless love-land.

     XIX.

     By the windy waters of the Michigan
     She invokes the gods. . . .  Be it bright or dim,
     Who does his endeavor as best he can
     Does bravely, indeed.  The rest is with Him.
     Let a new star dance in the Occident
     Till it shakes through the gossamer floors of God
     And shines, o'er Chicago. . .  The Orient
     Is hoar with glories.  Let Illini sod
     Bear glory as well as the gleaming grain,
     And engines smoking along her plain.


     JOAQUIN MILLER.

     CHICAGO, NOV., 1875.




MAE MADDEN.



CHAPTER I.

     SCENE.  Deck of an ocean steamer.

     Characters:
     Mrs. Jerrold,  matron and chaperon in general.
     Edith Jerrold, her daughter.
     Albert Madden, a young man on study intent.
     Eric,          his brother, on pleasure bent.
     Norman Mann,   cousin of the Jerrolds, old classmate of the
          Maddens.
     Mae Madden,    sister of the brothers and leading lady.

"It's something like dying, I do declare," said Mae, and as she spoke
a suspicious-looking drop slid softly across her cheek, down over the
deck-railing, to join its original briny fellows in the deep below.

"What is like dying?" asked Eric.

"Why, leaving the only world you know. There, you see, papa and mamma
are fast fading away, and here we are traveling off at the rate of ever
so many miles an hour."

"Knots, Mae; do be nautical at sea."

"Away from everything and everybody we know. I do really think it is
like dying,--don't you, Mr. Mann?" Mae turned abruptly and faced the
young man by her side.

"People aren't apt to die in batches or by the half-dozen," he replied,
coolly. "If you were all by yourself, it would be more like it, I
suppose, but you are taking quite a slice of your own world along with
you, and really--"

"And really pity is the very last article I have any use for. You are
right. I was only sorry for the moment. 'Eastward Ho' is a very happy
cry. How differently we shall all take Europe," she continued, in
a moment. "There is Albert, I honestly believe he will live in his
Baedeker just because he can see no further than the covers of a book.
You need not laugh, for it is a fact that people confined for years to
a room can't see beyond its limits when they are taken out into broader
space, and I don't see why it shouldn't be the same with a man who lives
in his books as Albert does."

"He sees the world in his books," said Mr. Mann, with a little spirit.

"He gets a microscopic view of it, yes," replied Mae, grandiloquently,
"and Edith--"

"Always sees just what he does," suggested Eric maliciously.

"Now, boys," said Miss Mae, assuming suddenly a mighty patronage, "I
will not have you hit at Albert and Edith in this way. It will be very
annoying to them. They have a right to act just as absurdly as they
choose. We none of us know how people who are falling in love would
act."

No, the boys agreed this was quite true.

"And I really do suppose they are falling in love, don't you?" queried
Mae.

Yes, they did both believe it.

Just here, up came the two subjects of conversation, looking, it must be
confessed, as much like one subject as any man and wife.

"What are you talking of?" asked Edith, "Madame Tussaud or a French
salad? No matter how trivial the topic, I am sure it has a foreign
flavor."

"There you are mistaken," replied the frank Eric, "we were discussing
you two people, in the most homelike kind of a way."

At this Edith blushed, Albert frowned, Mae scowled at Eric, who opened
his eyes amazedly, Norman Mann looked over the deck railing and laughed,
the wind blew, the sailors heave-ho-ed near by, and there was a grand
tableau vivant for a few seconds.

"O, come," cried Mae, "suppose we stop looking like a set of
illustrations for a phrenological journal, expressive of the various
emotions. I was only speculating on the different sights we should see
in the same places. Confess, now, Albert. Won't your eyes be forever
hunting out old musty, dusty volumes? Will not books be your first
pleasures in the sight-seeing line?"

"O, no, pictures," cried Edith.

"That is as you say," Mae demurely agreed. "Pictures and books for you
two at any rate."

"And churches."

"For your mother, yes, and beer-gardens for Eric, and amphitheatres and
battle fields for Mr. Mann."

"And for yourself?"

"The blue, blue bay of Naples, a grove of oranges, moonlight and a boat
if it please you."

"By the way," suggested Albert, "about our plans; we really should begin
to agitate the matter at once."

"Yes, to do our fighting on shipboard. Let us agree to hoist the white
flag the day we sight land, else we shall settle down into a regular War
of the Roses and never decide," laughed Norman.

"As there are six minds," continued Albert, "there will have to be some
giving up."

"Why do you look at me?" enquired Mae. "I am the very most unselfish
person in the world. I'll settle down anywhere for the winter, provided
only that it is not in Rome."

"But that is the very place," cried Edith, and Albert, and Mrs. Jerrold
from her camp-chair.

"O, how dreadful! The only way to prevent it will be for us to stand
firm, boys, and make it a tie."

"But Norman is especially eager to go to Rome," said Edith, "and that
makes us four strong at once in favor of that city."

"But is not Rome a fearful mixture of dead Caesar's bones and dirty
beggars? And mustn't one carry hundreds of dates at one's finger-tips to
appreciate this, and that, and the other? Is it not all tremendously and
overwhelmingly historical, and don't you have to keep exerting your mind
and thinking and remembering? I would rather go down to Southern Italy
and look at lazzaroni lie on stone walls, in red cloaks, as they do in
pictures, and not be obliged to topple off the common Italian to pile
the gray stone with old memories of some great dead man. Everything is
ghostly in Rome. Now, there must be some excitement in Southern Italy.
There's Vesuvius, and she isn't dead--like Nero--but a living demon,
that may erupt any night, and give you a little red grave by the sea for
your share."

"She's not nearly through yet," laughed Edith, as Mae paused for breath.

"I'm only afraid," said Mae, "that after I had been down there a week,
I should forget English, buy a contadina costume, marry a child of the
sun, and run away from this big world with its puzzles and lessons,
and rights and wrongs. Imagine me in my doorway as you passed in your
travelling carriage, hot and tired on your way--say to Sorrento. I would
dress my beautiful Italian all up in scarlet flowers and wreathe his big
hat and kiss his brown eyes and take his brown hand, and then we would
run along by the bay and laugh at you stiff, grand world's folks as we
skipped past you."

"We shall know where to look for you, if ever you do disappear," said
Norman Mann.

"But, my dear Mae," added Albert, "though this is amusing, it is utterly
useless."

"Amusing things always are," said Mae.

"The question is, shall we or shall we not go to Rome for the winter?"

"Certainly, by all means, and if I don't like it, I'll run away to
Sorrento," and Mae shook her sunny head and twinkled her eyes in a
fascinating sort of way, that made Eric feel a proud brotherly pleasure
in this saucy young woman, and that gave Norman Mann a sort of feeling
he had had a good deal of late, a feeling hard to define, though we have
all known it, a delicious concoction of pleasure and pain. His eyes were
fixed on Mae, now. "What is it?" she asked. "You will like Rome, I am
sure." "No, I never like what I think I shall not."

"It might save some trouble, then, if I ask you now if you expect to
like me," said he, in a lower tone. "Why certainly, I do like you very
much," she replied, honestly. "What a stupid question," he thinks,
vexedly. "Why did I tell him I liked him?" she thinks, blushingly. So
the waves of anxiety and doubt begin to swell in these two hearts as
the outside waves beat with a truer sea-motion momently against the
steamer's side.

Between days of sea-sickness come delightful intervals of calm sea and
fresh breezes, when the party fly to the hurricane deck to get the very
quintessence of life on the ocean wave. One morning Mrs. Jerrold and
Edith were sitting there alone, with rugs and all sorts of head devices
in soft wools and flannels, and books and a basket of fruit. The matron
of the party was a tall, fine-looking woman, a good type of genuine
New England stock softened by city breeding. New Englanders are so many
propositions from Euclid, full of right angles and straight lines, but
easy living and the dressmaker's art combine to turn the corners gently.
Edith was like her mother, but softened by a touch of warm Dutch blood.
She was tall, almost stately, with a good deal of American style, which
at that time happened to be straight and slender. She was naturally
reserved, but four years of boarding-school life had enriched her store
of adjectives and her amount of endearing gush-power, and she had
at least six girl friends to whom she sent weekly epistles of some
half-dozen sheets in length, beginning, each one of them, with "My
dearest ----" and ending "Your devoted Edith."

As Edith and her mother quietly read, and ate grapes, and lolled in a
delightfully feminine way, voices were heard,--Mae's and Norman's. They
were in the middle of a conversation. "Yes," Mae was saying, "you
do away with individuality altogether nowadays, with your dreadful
classifications. It is all the same from daffodils up to women."

"How do we classify women, pray?"

"In the mind of man," began Mae, as if she were reading, "there are
three classes of women; the giddy butterflies, the busy bees, and the
woman's righters. The first are pretty and silly; the second, plain
and useful; the third, mannish and odious. The first wear long trailing
dresses and smile at you while waltzing, the second wear aprons and give
you apple-dumplings, and the third want your manly prerogatives, your
dress-coat, your money, and your vote. Flirt with the giddy butterflies,
your first love was one. First loves always are. Marry the busy bee.
Your mother was a busy bee. Mothers always are. And keep on the other
side of the street from the woman's righter as long as you can. Alas!
your daughter will be one."

"Well, isn't there any classifying on the other side? Aren't there
horsemen and sporting men and booky men, in the feminine mind?"

"Perhaps so. There certainly are the fops, and nowadays this terrible
army of reformers and radicals, of whom my brother Albert here is the
best known example."

"What is it?" asked Albert, looking up abstractedly from his book, for
he and Eric had sauntered up the stairs too, by this time.

"They are the creatures," continued Mae, "who scorn joys and idle
pleasures. They deal with the good of the many and the problems of the
universe, and step solemnly along to that dirge known as the March of
Progress. And what do they get for it all? Something like this. Put down
your book, I'm going to prophesy," and Mae backed resolutely up against
the railing and held her floating scarfs and veils in a bunch at her
throat, while she prophesied in this way:

"Behold me, direct lineal descendant of Albert Madden, speaking to my
children in the year 1995: 'What, children, want amusement? Want to see
the magic lantern to note the effects of light? Alas! how frivolous.
Listen, children, to the achievements of your great ancestor, as
reported by the Encyclopedia. "A. Madden--promoter of civilization and
progress, chiefly known by his excellent theory entitled The Number of
Cells in a Human Brain compared to the Working Powers of Man, and that
remarkable essay, headed by this formula: Given--10,000,000 laboring
men, to find the number of loaves of bread in the world." Here,
children, take these works. Progressimus, you may have the theory, while
Civilizationica reads the essay. Then change about. Ponder them well,
and while we walk to the Museum later, tell me their errors. Then I will
show you the preserved ears of the first man found in Boshland by P. T.
Barnum, jr.' Oh, bosh," said Mae suddenly, letting fly her streamers,
"what a dry set of locusts you nineteenth century leaders are. You are
devouring our green land, and some of us butterflies would like to turn
our yellow wings into solid shields against you, if we could. There,
I've made a goose of myself again on the old subject. Edith, there's the
lunch bell. Take me down before I say another word." Exeunt feminines
all.

"Where did the child pick up all that?" queried Albert.

"'All that' is in the air just now," answered Norman. "It is a natural
reaction of a strong physical nature against the utilitarian views of
the day. Miss Mae is a type of--"

"O, nonsense, what prigs you are," interrupted Eric, "Mae is jolly. Do
stop your reasoning about her. If you are bound to be a potato yourself
to help save the masses from starvation, don't grumble because she grew
a flower. Come, let us go to lunch too."

Conversation was not always of this sort. One evening, not long after,
there was a moon, and Edith and Albert were missing. Eric was following
a blue-eyed girl along the deck, and Mae and Norman wandered off by
themselves up to this same hurricane deck again. The moonlight was
wonderful. It touched little groups here and there and fell full on the
face of a woman in the steerage, who sat with her arms crossed on her
knee and her face set eastward. She was singing, and her voice rose
clearly above the puff of the engine and the jabber below. There was a
chorus to the song, in which rough men and tired looking women joined.
The song was about home, and once in a while the girl unclasped her arms
and passed her hands over her eyes. Mae and Norman Mann looked at her
silently. "I suppose we don't know when we make pictures," said Mae.
"Don't we?" asked Norman pointedly. Mae looked very reprovingly out from
her white wraps at him, but he smiled back composedly and admiringly,
and drew her hand a trifle closer in his arm. And saucy Mae began to
feel in that sort of purring mood women come to when they drop the
bristling, ready-for-fight air with which they start on an acquaintance.
Perhaps, if the steamer had been a sailing-vessel, there would have
been no story to tell about Mae Madden, for a long line of evenings,
and girls singing songs, and hurricane decks by moonlight, are dangerous
things. But the vessel was a fast steamer, and was swiftly nearing land
again.



CHAPTER II.


ROME, February, 18--.

MY DEAR MAMMA:--Yes, it is Rome, mamma, and everybody is impressed.
The boys talk of emperors all the time; Edith is wild over Madonnas
and saints, and Mrs. Jerrold runs from Paul's house to Paul's walks and
Paul's drives and Paul's stand at the prisoner's bar, and reads the Acts
through five times a day, in the most religious and Romanistic spirit.
No one could make more fuss over a patron saint, I am sure. For my part,
I feel as if I were in the most terrible ghost story. The old Romans are
all around me. Underneath the street noises, I seem to hear cries, and
in the air I half see a constant flashing of swords and scars and blood,
and I can't even put my foot on the Roman pavement without wondering
which dead Caesar my saucy Burt boot No. 2 is walking over. I shouldn't
mind trampling old Caligula, but I don't like the thought on general
principles. I feel all out of place, so modern and fixed up and
flimsy. If I could get into old picturesque clothes and out of the
English-speaking quarter, I should not be so oppressed and might worship
Rome. But I seriously think I shall die if I stay here much longer.
There's a spirit-malaria that eats into my life. I feel as if all the
volumes of Roman history bound in heavy vellum, that papa has in his
study, were laid right on top of my little heart, so that every time it
beats, it thumps against them, and I assure you, mamma, its worse than
dyspepsia. If I could only get out on a New England hillside, where
there were no graves more important than those of grasshoppers and
butterflies! What should I do when I got there? Take off my hat, and
scream for joy, and feel free and glad to be in a fresh country, with
rich, warm, untainted earth and young life.

But all this is nonsense, mamma, and I shouldn't be writing it, if
I hadn't just come from the catacombs of St. Calixtus. To think of
Albert's insisting upon going there the very first thing! But so he
did, and so we went, and talked solemnly about the Appian Way, and saw
everybody's tombs and ashes, and quoted poetry, until I stuck a pin in
Albert's arm and sang Yankee Doodle, to keep from crying. Then, oh, how
shocked they looked. Even Mr. Mann seemed ashamed of me. When we reached
the place, we each took a candle and the guide led the way down into
the bowels of the earth. Mamma, they are very unpleasant. There were two
German youths along, and green lizards crawled all over. They winked at
me. The way grew so narrow that we had to walk one by one through lines
of wall perforated with holes for dead bodies. Once in a while we would
come to a small chapel, for miserable variety's sake, and be told to
admire some very old, very wretched painting. Jonah and the whale were
represented in a double-barreled miracle picture. Not only was the whale
about to swallow Jonah, but he was only as large as a good-sized brook
trout, while Jonah towered away above him like a Goliath. I found myself
wondering if the guide had convulsions, and, if he should have one now,
and die, how many days would pass before we should eat each other. And
would they take me first, because I am youngest and plumpest? Albert
would make good soup bones, and Eric's shoulder serve as a delicious
fore-quarter. And by the time we came to the top again, I was all ready
to cry. And then, mamma, I did an awful thing. Mr. Mann exclaimed: "Why,
Miss Mae, how frightened you look. You are quite white." And I answered
very sharply: "What a disagreeable man you are. I'm not frightened at
all." I said it in a dreadful tone, and how his face changed. He looked
so strangely. Everybody was still but Albert, and he said, "Why, Mae,
you are very rude to Mr. Mann." Even then I didn't apologize. So here we
are at sword's points, and all the rest sympathizing with my foe, who
is only on the defensive. Why am I such a belligerent? I can't conceive
where I got my nature, unless from that very disagreeable dear old
grandpapa of papa's, who fought the whole world all his life. But how
egotistic I am, even to my mother. Of course you want to know how we
are lodged and clothed and fed. We have taken apartments, as I presume
Albert wrote you, on the Via San Nicolo da Tolentino, quite near the
Costanzi hotel, which is in the height of the fashion as a hotel; near
too, which is better, to Mr. Story's studio and the old Barberini palace
and the Barberini square and fountains. Off behind, is that terrible
church of the Cappucini, with its cemetery underneath of bones and
skulls and such horrors. I like the apartments very much, principally
because I have made three staunch friends and one good enemy, in the
kitchen. The padrona,--she's the woman who keeps the house, and serves
us, too, in this case--though Mrs. Jerrold has a maid to wait on the
table and care for our rooms--well, the padrona is my first friend. Her
cousin, a handsome southern Italian, is here on a visit, and she is not
only my friend, but my instructress. She tells me lovely stories about
her home and the peasants and their life, while I sit on the floor with
Giovanni,--friend number three and eldest son of the padrona,--and even
Roberto, my enemy, the crying baby of three years, hushes his naughty
mouth to listen to Lisetta, for that is the cousin's name. I am so
glad I studied Italian as hard as I did for my music, for it comes very
easily to me now, and already I slip the pretty words from my halting
tongue much more smoothly and quickly than you would imagine I could.
Mrs. Jerrold isn't quite satisfied, and would prefer the Costanzi, only
she doesn't believe in letting us girls stay at large hotels. She and
Edith are shocked at my kitchen tastes, so that I generally creep off
quietly and say nothing about it. It is strange for me to have to keep
anything secret, but I am learning how.

As for our clothes, O, mamma, Edith is ravishing in a deep blue-black
silk, with a curly, wavy sort of fringe on it, and odd loopings here
and there where you don't expect to find them. What can't a Parisian
dressmaker do? They have such a wonderful idea of appropriateness, it
seems to me. Now, at home you know we girls always wear the same sort
of thing, but Madame H---- says no, Edith, and I should dress very
differently; and now Edith's clothes all have a flow, and sweep, and
grace about them, and her silks rustle in a stately way as she walks,
while my dresses haven't any trimming to speak of, but are cut in a
clinging, square sort of way, with jackets, and here and there a buckle,
that makes me feel half the time as if I were playing soldier in a
lady-like fashion. But what a budget this is. How shocked the people
here would be. They take travel so solemnly, mamma, and treat Baedeker,
like the Bible,--and here am I crushing down Rome, and raising Paris on
top of it. Indeed, I can't help it, for Paris is utterly intoxicating.
It takes away your moral nature and adds it all into your powers of
enjoyment. Well, good-bye, my dear, and keep writing me tremendous
letters, won't you; for I do love you dearly.

Your loving daughter,

MAE.


Mae felt a great deal better when she had finished the letter, and, like
a volatile girl as she was, buttoned her Burt boots and Paris gloves,
singing gaily a dash from Trovatore in a very light-hearted manner.

"Why, you look like a different girl," cried Eric, as she entered the
parlor, where he and Mr. Mann were sitting. "Mrs. Jerrold, Edith, and
Albert have gone on in a carriage, and you are left to my tender care;
will you ride or walk?"

"How can you ask? My feet are quite wild. No wonder I am a different
girl. Are we not going to the Pincian hill to look at the live world and
people? I have just unlocked the stop-gates and let the blood bound in
my veins as it wants to."

"It has been taking the cinque-pace, I should say from your long face
to-day."

"O, it has only been trying to keep step with the march of the ages, or
some such stately tread, but it was hard work, and now the dear life
of me hops, skips and jumps, like this," and Mae seized her brother and
danced across the room, stopping very near Mr. Mann, who stood with his
back to them, drumming on the window pane. She looked at him quizzically
and half raised her eyebrows.

Eric shook his head, and said aloud in his outspoken way: "You owe him
an apology, Mae, for this morning's rudeness."

Mr. Mann turned quickly. "I am surprised, Eric. Let your sister find out
for herself when she is rude."

"Bless me," cried Eric, "what is the row?"

Mae looked determined. "Are you going to the Pincian with us?" she
asked.

"No, I am going to stay home."

"Well, good-bye, then. Come, Eric." The door closed behind them.

Mr. Mann stood by the window and watched them walk away. Mae, with her
eager, restless, fresh life showing out in every motion; Eric, with his
boy-man air and his student swing and happy-go-lucky toss of his head.
Mr. Mann smiled and then he sighed. "That's a good boy, so square and
fair and merry--and a queer girl," he added. "Rome isn't the place for
her. She must get away, though why I should take care for her, or worry
about her, little vixen. I don't see." Still he smiled as one would over
a very winning, very wicked child, and shortly after took his hat and
went to the Pincio, after all.

Meantime, the brother and sister had walked gaily along, passed the
Spanish Steps, and were on the Pincian hill. Here, Mae was indeed happy.
The fine equipages and dark, rich beauty of the Italians delighted her,
and she and Eric found a shaded bench, and watched the carriages drive
round and round, and criticised, and admired, and laughed like two idle
children. They bought some flowers, and Mae sat pulling them to pieces,
when they caught sight, down the pathway, of two approaching Piedmontese
officers.

"O," cried Mae, and dropped her flowers, and clasped her hands, and
sprang to her feet, "O, Eric, are they gods or men?"

The Piedmontese officer is godlike. He must be of a certain imposing
height to obtain his position, and his luxurious yellow moustaches and
blue black eyes, enriched and intensified by southern blood, give him a
strange fascination. The cold, manly beauty and strength of a northern
blonde meet with the heat and lithe grace of the more supple southerner
to produce this paragon. There is a combination of half-indolent
elegance and sensuous langour, with a fire, a verve, a nobility, that
puts him at the very head of masculine beauty. Add to the charms of
his physique, the jauntiest, most bewitching of uniforms, the clinking
spurs, the shining buttons, the jacket following every line of his
figure, and no wonder maidens' hearts seek him out always and young
pulses beat quicker at his approach.

Mae's admiration was simply rapturous. Utterly regardless of the pretty
picture she herself made, of her vivid coloring and sparkling beauty,
she stood among her dropped flowers until the two pairs of eyes were
fixed upon her. Then she became suddenly aware of her attitude and with
quick feminine cunning endeavored to transfer her admiration to some
beautiful horses cantering by, exclaiming in Italian, that the officers
might surely understand she was thinking only of the fine animals: "O,
what wonderful horses!"

The foreign pronunciation, Eric's amusement, Mae's confusion, were not
lost upon the men. Their curiosity was piqued, their eyes and pride
gratified. They sauntered leisurely past, only to turn a corner and
quicken their steps again toward the bench where Eric and Mae were
seated. They found the brother and sister just arising, and followed
them slowly.

An Italian is quick to detect secrets. The two had not proceeded far
before one said to the other; "Eh, Luigi, we are not the only interested
party."

Luigi looked slowly around and saw a crowd of Italian loungers gazing
at the little stranger with their softly-bold black eyes full of
admiration. He shrugged his shoulders slightly. "Bah, they gaze in that
way at all womankind. See, now they are watching the next one," and as
he spoke, the boys turned with one accord to stare at a young Italian
girl, who pressed closer to the side of her hook-nosed old duenna:

"It is not those loungers that I noticed," replied the other. "Look
there," and he waved his hand lightly toward the left, where, under a
large-leafed tree, gazing apparently in idleness, stood a young man.

"Ah," said Luigi, still incredulous, "he sees nothing but Rome; he is
fresh from over the seas."

"No, no, watch his eyes," replied the other.

They were assuredly fixed, with a keen searching glance, on a little
form before them, and as Eric and Mae suddenly turned to the left, the
stranger, half carelessly, but very quickly, crossed to another path,
from which he could watch them, but be, in his turn, unobserved.

"Jealous," laughed Luigi, shrugging his shoulders again. "Her lover,
probably."

"No," replied Bero, "but he may be some time." Then after a moment's
pause, "Good evening," he said carelessly. "I am going to say my prayers
at vespers. I've been a sorry scamp of late."

Luigi laughed disdainfully and lightly. "You want to get rid of me?
Well, be it so. I don't want to lose my heart over a little foreigner. I
have other game. However, Lillia shall not know of it. Addio, Bero." So
Luigi went off the other way, and Bero, with a flushed face, followed
Mae at a distance, and kept an eye on the stranger, flattering himself
that he was quite unnoticed by those sharp, keen eyes. He was mistaken,
Norman Mann had seen the officers before they saw him, had watched their
footsteps, and had a pretty clear idea of the whole affair.

Mae walked on happily, chatting with Eric, and with that vague,
delightful feeling of something exciting in the air. She knew there was
an officer behind her, because she had heard the clicking spurs, but she
only guessed that he might be one of the two who had passed--the
taller, perhaps,--which, of course, he was. She had, moreover, in some
mysterious way, caught sight of a figure resembling Norman Mann, trying,
she thought, to avoid her. Her spirits rose with the half-mystery, and
she grew brighter and prettier and more magnetic to the two followers as
she tossed her shoulders slightly and now and then half-turned her sunny
head.

As for Eric, he was totally unconscious of any secrets. He fancied
himself and his pretty, nice, little sister all alone by their very
selves, and he went so far as to expatiate on the vastness of the world,
and how in this crowd there was no other life that bordered or touched
on theirs.

To which Mae replied: "You don't know; you may fall in love with one of
these very Italian girls, or my future husband may be walking behind
me now." When she had said this, she flushed scarlet and was very much
ashamed of herself in her heart.

"We must go home now," Eric replied, quite disdaining such sybilistic
remarks. So they left the hill and went down the Steps in the rich
afternoon light, and so homewards. Of course the Italian and Mr. Mann
still followed them; Norman on the other side of the street, the Italian
in a slyer, less conspicuous manner, by taking side streets, or the next
parallel pavement, and appearing only at every corner in the distance.
He appeared, however, close at hand, as Mae and Eric turned into
their lodgings. His eyes met Mae's. She blushed involuntarily as she
recognized him, and at once, in that moment, there was an invisible
half-acquaintance established between the two. If they should ever meet
again, they would remember each other.

Mae crept off to the kitchen that evening, to beg for another of
Lisetta's stories, and quite forgot her walk, the officer, and Norman
Mann while she listened to the


STORY OF TALILA.

Talila was a young girl, destined to be a nun. She was a naughty little
girl and would make wry faces at the thought, and wish she could be a
man, a soldier or sailor, instead of being a woman and a nun; and as she
grew older she would dance all the time, and didn't say her prayers very
much, and was so bad that the priest sent for her to see him. He told
her how wicked she was, and that, too, when she was to be the bride of
the church; but she said the church had many, many brides, and she would
rather be the bride of Giovanni; and that she loved red-cheeked babies
better than beads, and songs were nicer than prayers. Should she sing
him such a pretty, gay one she knew? And the priest could hardly keep
from laughing at the bright-eyed, naughty, naughty Talila. But he said:
"If Giovanni does not want to marry you, will you then become the bride
of the church?" And Talila laughed aloud and tossed her head. "Giovanni
longs to marry me, Father," she said, "I know that already." But the
Father sent for Giovanni and gave him money if he would say he did
not want to marry Talila. At first he would not say so, but the Father
showed him a purse all full of silver, which Talila's mother had brought
him, for it was she who had vowed Talila should be a nun. Then the
Father said: "This is yours if you say as I wish, and if not, you shall
be cursed forever, and all your children shall be cursed, because you
have married the bride of the church." Then Giovanni crossed himself and
took the bag of silver, and the priest sent for Talila, and she heard
her Giovanni say he didn't want to marry her--she had better be a nun;
and she threw up her brown arms and screamed aloud, and fell down as if
dead. And afterwards she was very ill, and when she grew better she had
forgotten everything and was only a little child, and she loves little
children, and is ever with them, but she calls them all Giovanni. They
play together by the bay through the long day, and at night she takes
them to their mothers, and goes alone to her home. But alas! she
never tells her beads, or prays a prayer, and sorry things are said of
her--that God gave her up because she left Him. But the children all
love her, and she loves them.



CHAPTER III.


Edith and Mae had a quarrel one morning. Mae's tongue was sharp, but
although she breezed quickly, she calmed again very soon. The latter
fact availed her little this time, for Edith maintained a cold
displeasure that would not be melted by any bright speeches or frank
apologies. "Edith," said little Miss Mae, quite humbly for her, as she
put on her hat, and drew on her gloves, "Edith, aren't you going out
with me?" "What for?" asked that young person indifferently.

"Why--for fun, and to make up. Haven't you forgiven me yet?"

Edith did not reply directly. "I am going out with mamma to buy our
dominoes for the Carnival, and to see our balcony. Albert has engaged
one for us, on the corner of the Corso and Santa Maria e Jesu. I suppose
you can go too. There will be an extra seat. We'll come home by the
Pincian Hill."

"Thank you," said Mae, "but I will get Eric and go for a tramp," and she
left the room with compressed lips and flushed cheeks. In the hall were
Albert, Eric and Norman, talking busily. "Where are you going Eric,
mayn't I go too, please?" "I'm sorry Mae, but this is an entirely
masculine affair--five-button gloves and parasols are out of the
question."

"O, Ric, I am half lonely." Mae laughed a little hysterically. At that
moment she caught Mr. Mann's eyes, full of sympathy. "But goodbye," she
added, and opened the door, "I'm going."

"Alone?" asked Norman, involuntarily.

"Yes, alone," replied Mae. "Have you any objections, boys?" Eric and
Albert were talking busily and did not hear her. Norman Mann held open
the door for her to pass out, and smiled as she thanked him. She smiled
back. She came very near saying, "I'm sorry I was rude the other day,
forgive me," and he came very near saying, "May I go with you, Miss
Mae?" But they neither of them spoke, and Norman closed the door with
a sigh, and Mae walked away with a sigh. It was only a little morning's
experience, sharp words, misunderstandings; but the child was young, far
from home and her mother, and it seemed hard to her. She was in a very
wild mood, a very hard mood, and yet all ready to be softened by a kind,
sympathetic word, so nearly do extremes of emotion meet.

"There's no one to care a pin about me," said she to herself, "not a
pin. I have a great mind to go and take the veil or drown myself in the
Tiber. Then they would be bound to search for me, and convent vows and
Tiber mud hold one fast. No, I won't, I'll go and sit in the Pincian
gardens and talk Italian with the very first person I meet and forget
all about myself. I wish Mr. Mann wouldn't pity me. Dear me, here I am
remembering these forlorn people again. I wish I could see mamma and
home this morning,--the dear old library. Why the house is shut up and
mamma's south. I forgot that, and here am I all alone. It is like being
dead. There, I have dropped a tear on my tie and spoiled it! Besides, if
one is dead, there comes Heaven. Why shouldn't I play dead, and make my
own Heaven?" Here Mae seated herself, for she was on the Pincio by this
time, and looked off at the view, at that wonderful view of St. Peter's,
the Tiber, all the domes and rising ruins and afar the campagna. "I
wouldn't make my Heaven here," thought this dreadful Mae, "not if it is
beautiful. I'd not stay here a single other day. Bah no!" and she shook
her irreverent little fist right down at the Eternal City.

At this moment, a small beggar, who had been pleading unnoticed at her
side, was lifted from his feet by a powerful hand, and a shower of soft
Italian imprecations fell on Mae's ear. She sprang up quickly, "No, no,"
she cried in Italian, "how dare you hurt a harmless boy?" She lifted
her face full toward that of the man who had inspired her wrath, and her
eyes met those of the Piedmontese officer. She blushed scarlet.

"Pardon, a thousand pardons," began he. "It was for your sake,
Signorina. I saw you shake your hand that he should leave you, and I
fancied that the little scamp was troubling the foreign lady."

Mae laughed frankly, although she was greatly confused. The officer and
the beggar boy behind him waited expectantly. "I shook my hand at my
thoughts," she explained. "I did not see the boy. Forgive me, Signor,
for my hasty words."

The officer enjoyed her confusion quietly. He threw a handful of small
coin at the beggar, and bade him go. Then he turned again to Mae. "I am
sorry, Signorina, that your thoughts are sad. I should think they would
all be like sweet smiles." He said this with an indescribable delicacy
and gallantry, as if he half feared to speak to her, but his sympathy
must needs express itself.

Mae was, as we have seen, in a reckless, wild mood. She did not realize
what she was doing. She had just broken down all barriers in her mind,
was dead to her old life, and ready to plan for Heaven. And here before
her stood a wonderful, sympathizing, new friend, who spoke in a strange
tongue, lived in a strange land was as far removed from her old-time
people and society as an inhabitant of Saturn, or an angel. She accepted
him under her excitement, as she would have accepted them. No waiting
for an introduction, no formal getting-acquainted talk, no reserve. She
looked into the devoted, interested eyes above her, and said frankly:

"I was feeling all alone, and I hate Rome. I thought I would like to
play I was dead, and plan out a Heaven for myself. It should not be in
Rome. And then I suppose I shook my fist."

"Where would your Heaven be?" asked the Piedmontese, falling quickly,
with ready southern sympathy, into her mood. Mae seated herself on the
bench and made room for him at her side.

"Where should it be?" she repeated. "Down among the children of the sun,
all out in the rich orange fields, by the blue Bay of Naples, I think,
with Vesuvius near by, and Capri; yes, it would be in Sorrento that I
should find my heaven."

The officer smiled under his long moustaches. "For three days,--at a
hotel, Signorina."

"No, no; with the peasants. I am tired and sick of books, and people,
and reasons. Shall I give you a day of my Heaven?"

Bero smiled and bent slightly forward and rested his hand lightly on the
stick of her parasol, which lay between them. "Go on," he said.

"I would fill my apron with sweet flowers and golden fruit--great
oranges, and those fragrant, delicious tiny mandarins--and I would get
a crowd of little Italians about me, all a-babbling their pretty, pretty
tongue, and I would go down to the bay and get in an anchored boat, and
lie there all the morning, catching the sunlight in my eyes, trimming
the brown babies and the boat with flowers, looking off at the water
and the clouds, tossing the pretty fruit, and laughing, and playing, and
enjoying. Later, there'd be a run on the beach, and a ride on a donkey,
and a dance, with delirious music and frolic. And then the moon and
quiet,--and I would steal away from the crowd, and take a little boat,
and float and drift--"

"Alone?" asked Bero, softly. "Surely, you wouldn't condemn a
mountaineer's yellow moustache, or a soldier's spurs and sword, if at
heart he was really a child of the sun also? May I share your day of
Heaven? It would be paradise for me, too." All this in the same soft,
deferential manner.

"Well, well," half laughed, half sighed Mae. "All this is a dream,
unless, indeed, I go home with Lisetta."

"Who is Lisetta?"

"Our padrona's cousin. She is here on a visit. She lives within a mile
of Sorrento, on the coast. She goes home at the end of Carnival. Oh,
how I do long for Carnival," continued Mae, frankly and confidentially.
"Don't you? I am like a child over it, I am trying already to persuade
Eric--that is my brother--to take me down on the Corso the last night,
for the Mocoletti. It would be much better fun than staying on our
balcony."

"Where is your balcony?" asked Bero, stroking his long moustaches.

"It is on the corner of Maria e Jesu, and if I ever see you coming by, I
shall be tempted to pepper your pretty uniform. How beautiful it is!"

"Yes," replied Bero, again gazing proudly down at his lithe figure, in
its well-fitting clothes, "but I would be willing to be showered with
confetti daily to see you. How shall I know you? What is to be the color
of your domino?" And he bent forward, hitting his spurs against the
paving stones, flashing his deep eyes, and half reaching out his hand,
in that same tender, respectful way.

Mae saw the sunlight strike his hair; she half heard his deep breath;
and, like a flood, there suddenly swept over her the knowledge that this
new friend, this sympathizing soul, was an unknown man, and that she
was a girl. What had she done? What could she do? Confusion and
embarrassment suddenly overtook her. She bent her eyes away from those
other eyes, that were growing bolder and more tender in their gaze.
"I--I--" she began, and just at this very inauspicious moment, while
she sat there, flushed, by the stranger's side, the clatter of
swiftly-approaching wheels sounded, and a carriage turned the corner,
containing Mrs. Jerrold, Edith, Albert, and Norman Mann. They all saw
her.

Mae laughed. It was such a dreadful situation that it was funny, and she
laughed again. "Those are my friends," she said, in a low voice. "We
can walk away," replied the officer, and turned his face in the opposite
direction. "It is too late; and, besides, why should we?" And Mae looked
full in his face, then turned to the carriage, which was close upon
them.

"How do you all do?" she cried, gleefully and bravely. "Isn't there room
for me in there? Mrs. Jerrold, I would like to introduce Signor--your
name?"--she said, quite clearly, in Italian, turning to the officer.

"Bero," he replied.

"Signor Bero. He was very kind, and saved me from--from a little beggar
boy."

"You must have been in peril, indeed," remarked Mrs. Jerrold, bowing
distantly to Bero, and beckoning the coachman, as Mae sprang into the
carriage, to drive on. "I am sorry to put you on the box, Norman,"
Mrs. Jerrold added, as Mae took the seat, in silence, that Mr. Mann
had vacated for her, "and I hope Miss Mae is also." But Mae didn't hear
this. She was plucking up courage in her heart, and assuming a saucy
enough expression, that sat well on her bright face. Indeed, she was
a pretty picture, as she sat erect, with lips and nostrils a trifle
distended, and her head a little in the air. The Italian thought so,
as he walked away, smiling softly, clicking his spurs and stroking
his moustache; and Norman Mann thought so too, as he tapped his cane
restlessly on the dash-board and scowled at the left ear of the off
horse. The party preserved an amazed and stiff silence, as they drove
homeward.

"Eric," cried Norman, very late that same night. "Do be sober, I have
something to say to you about Miss Mae."

"Norman, old boy, how can a fellow of my make be sober when he has drunk
four glasses of wine, waltzed fifteen times, and torn six flounces from
a Paris dress? Why, man, I am delirious, I am. Tra, la, la, tra, la,
la. Oh, Norman, if you could have heard that waltz," and Eric seized his
companion in his big arms and started about the room in a mad dance. "You
are Miss Hopkins, Norman, you are. Here goes--" but Norman struck out
a bold stroke that nearly staggered Eric and broke loose. "For Heaven's
sake, Eric, stop this fooling; I want to speak to you earnestly."

"Evidently," replied Eric, with excited face, "forcibly also. Blows
belong after words, not before," and the big boy tramped indignantly off
to bed.

Norman Mann was in earnest truly, forcible also, for he opened his mouth
to let out a very expressive word as Eric left the room. It did him good
seemingly, for he strode up and down more quietly. At last he sat down
and began to talk with himself. "Norman Mann, you've got to do it all
alone," he said. "Albert and Edith and Aunt Martha are too vexed and
shocked to do the little rebel any good. Ric, oh, dear, Ric is a silly
boy, God bless him, and here I am doomed to make that child hate me, and
with no possible authority over her, or power, for that matter, trying
to keep her from something terribly wild. If they don't look out, she
will break loose. I know her well, and there's strong character under
this storm a-top, if only some one could get at it. Damn it." Norman
grew forcible again. "Why can't I keep my silly eyes away from her, and
go off with the fellows. You see," continued Norman, still addressing
his patient double, "she is a rebel, and--pshaw, I dare say it is half
my fancy, but I hate that long moustached officer. I wish he would be
summoned to the front and be shot. O, I forgot, there's no war. Well,
then, I wish he would fall in love with any body but Mae. It must be
late. Ric didn't leave that little party very early, I'm sure, but I
can't sleep. I'll get down my Sismondi and read awhile. I wonder if that
child is feeling badly now. I half believe she is--but here's my book."

Yes, Mae was feeling badly, heart-brokenly, all alone in her room. After
a long, harrowing talk with Mrs. Jerrold, at the close of which she
had received commands never to go out alone in Rome, because it wasn't
proper, she had been allowed to depart for her own room. Here she closed
the door leading into Mrs. Jerrold's and Edith's apartment, and opened
her window wide, and held her head out in the night air--the poisonous
Roman air. The street was very quiet. Now and then some late wayfarer
passed under the light at the corner, but Mae had, on the whole, a
desolate outlook--high, dark buildings opposite, and black clouds above,
with only here and there a star peeping through.

She had taken down her long hair, thrown off her dress, and half wrapped
herself in a shawl, out of which her bare arms stretched as she leaned
on the deep window seat. She looked like the first woman--of the
Darwinian, not the Biblical, Creation. There was a wild, half-hunted
expression on her face that was like the set air of an animal brought
suddenly to bay. She thought in little jerks, quick sentences that
were almost like the barking growls with which a beast lashes itself to
greater fury.

"They treated me unfairly. They had no right. I shall choose my own
friends. How dare they accuse me of flirting? I flirt, pah! I'd like to
run away. This stupid, stupid life!" And so on till the sentences grew
more human. "I suppose Mr. Mann thinks I am horrid, but I don't care.
I wish I could see Eric, he wouldn't blame me so. What a goose I am to
mind anyway. The Carnival is coming! Even these old tombs must give way
for ten whole riotous days. I must make them madly merry days. I wonder
how I will look in my domino. I suppose the pink one is mine."

So Miss Mae dried her eyes, picked her deshabille self from the window
seat, turned up the light, slipped into her pink and white carnival
attire, and walked to the window again.

"This is the Corso all full of people, and I'll pelt them merrily,
so, and so, and so!" She reached forth her bare, round arm into the
darkness, and looked down, where, full under the street light, gazing up
at her, stood the Piedmontese officer.

It was at that very moment that Norman Mann put down his Sismondi, and
looked from his window also.



CHAPTER IV.


Mae met Mr. Mann at the breakfast table the next morning without the
least embarrassment. Indeed, the little flutter in her talk could easily
be attributed to unusually high spirits and an excited and pleased
fancy. That was how Norman Mann translated it, of course. Really, the
flutter was a genuine stirring of her heart with inquietude, timidity
and semi-repentance; but Mae couldn't say this, and it's only what one
says out that can be reckoned on in this world. So Norman Mann, who saw
only the bright cheeks and eyes and restless quickening of an eager girl
and did not see the palpitating feminine heart inside, was displeased
and half-cold.

Could any one be long cold to Mae Madden? She believed not. She was
quite accustomed to lightning-like white heats of anger in those with
whom she came in contact, but coldness was out of her line. Still
she met the occasion well. "Shall I give you some coffee?" she asked,
pleasantly. "We breakfast all alone, until Eric appears. Mrs. Jerrold is
not well, and Edith and Albert are off for Frascati."

"Poor child; how much alone she is," he thought to himself.

"I understand we all go to the play tonight?" queried Mae.

"The thought of Shakspeare dressed in Italian is not pleasant to me,"
said Mr. Mann, after a silence of a few minutes.

"I am quite longing to see him in his new clothes. There is so much
softness and beauty in Italian that I expect to gain new ideas from
hearing the play robed in more flowing phrases. Shakspeare certainly is
for all the world."

"But Shakspeare's words are so strongly chosen that they are a great
element in his great plays. And a translation at best is something of a
parody, especially a translation from a northern tongue, with its
force and backbone, so to speak, into a southern, serpentine, gliding
language. You have heard the absurd rendering of that passage from
Macbeth where the witches salute him with 'Hail to thee, Macbeth! Hail
to thee, Thane of Cawdor!' into such French as 'Comment vous portez
vous, Monsieur Macbeth; comment vous portez vous, Monsieur Thane de
Cawdor!' A translation must pass through the medium of another mind, and
other minds like Shakspeare's are hard to find."

Norman spoke with so much reverence for Mae's greatest idol that her
heart warmed and she smiled approval, though for argument's sake she
remained on the other side.

"Isn't a translation more like an engraver's art, and aren't fine
engravings to be sought and admired even when we know the great original
in its glory of color? Then all writing is only translation, not
copying. Shakspeare had to translate the tongues he found in stones,
the books he found in brooks, with twenty-six little characters and his
great mind, into what we all study, and love, and strive after. But
he had to use these twenty-six characters in certain hard, Anglo-Saxon
forms and confine himself to them. When he wanted to talk about

     'fen-sucked fogs,'

and such damp, shivery places, he is all right, but when he sings of
'love's light wings,' and all that nonsense, he is impeded; now open to
him 'Italian, the language of angels'--you know the old rhyme--and
see what a chance he has among the "liquid l's and bell-voiced m's and
crushed tz's." To-night you will hear Desdemona call Othello 'Il mio
marito,' in a way that will start the tears. What are the stiff English
words to that? 'My husband!' Husband is a very uneuphonious name, I
think."

Norman Mann smiled. "Another cup of coffee, if you please--not quite as
sweet as the last," and he passed his cup. "I believe there is always a
charm in a novel word that has not been commonized by the crowd. 'Dear'
means very little to us nowadays, because every school girl is every
other school girl's 'dear,' and elderly ladies 'my dear' the world at
large, in a pretty and benevolent way. So with the words 'husband' and
'wife'; we hear them every day in commonest speech--'the coachman and
his wife,' or 'Sally Jones's husband,'--but I take it this is when we
stand outside. That wonderful little possessive pronoun MY has a great,
thrilling power. 'My husband' will be as fine to your ears as 'il mio
marito,' which has, after all, a slippery, uncertain sound; and as for
'my wife'--"

At that moment the coffee cup, which was on its way back, had reached
the middle of the table, where by right it should have been met and
guided by the steadier, masculine hand; Norman's hand was there in
readiness, but instead of gently removing the cup from Mae's clasp, it
folded itself involuntarily about the white, round wrist, as he paused
on these last words. Was it the little possessive pronoun that sent the
sudden thrill through the unexpecting wrist? At any rate it trembled;
the cup, the saucer, the coffee, the spoon, followed a well known
precedent, and "went to pieces all at once;" "all at once and nothing
first just as bubbles do when they burst." And so alas! did the
conversation, and that burst a beautiful bubble Norman had just blown.

Damages were barely repaired when Eric entered the breakfast room with a
petulant sort of face and flung himself into a chair. "My! what a head I
have on me this morning," he groaned. "Soda water would be worth all the
coffee in the world, Mae; I'll take it black, if you please. How cosy
you two look. I always take too much of every thing at a party, from
flirtation to--O, Mae, you needn't look so sad. I'm not the one in
disgrace now. Mrs. Jerrold, Edith and Albert are just piping mad at you,
and as for Mann, here,--by the way," and Eric rubbed his forehead, as if
trying to sharpen up a still sleepy memory, "I suppose you two have had
it out by this time. Norman sat up till ever so late to talk you over
with me, Mae. Do thank him for me; I am under the impression that I
didn't do so last night."

Mae tapped her fourth finger, on which a small ring glistened, sharply
against the cream jug. "If I were every body's pet lamb or black sheep,
I couldn't have more shepherd's crooks about me. Have you joined the
laudable band, Mr. Mann, and am I requested to thank you for that?"

"Not at all. Perhaps your brother's remembrances of last night are not
very distinct. I certainly sat up for Sismondi's sake, not for yours."
And he really thought, for the moment, that he told the truth.

"I warn you," continued Mae, rising as she spoke, "that I have a
tremendous retinue of mentors, and nurses, and governesses already.
You had better content yourself with the fact that you have four proper
traveling companions, and bear the disgrace of being shocked as best you
may by one wild scrap of femininity who will have her own way in spite
of you all." Mae half laughed, but she was serious, and the boys both
knew it.

"You flatter me," replied Norman, "I had aspired to no such position,
but for your brother's sake, if not for your own, I wished to tell Eric
that the Roman air at midnight was dangerous to your health. I saw you
had your window open."

"Did you look through the ceiling, pray?" Mae retorted from the
door-way. "Eric, ring if you want anything. Rosetta is close at hand."

"I have put my foot in it this time," said Eric, clumsily. "I am real
sorry, Norman, old boy."

Norman did not feel like being pitied, and this remark of Eric's roused
him. He fairly ground his teeth and clenched his hands, but his big
brown moustache and the tablecloth hid these outer manifestations of
anger. "Don't be a goose, Ric," he said. "What possible difference can
all this make to me? Your sister is young and quick."

Now, it was Eric's turn to wince. Was he giving this fellow the
impression that he thought his sister's opinions would affect him?
Horrible suspicion! Boys always fancy everybody in love with their
sister. He must cure that at once. "Of course," he replied quickly, "I
know you and Mae never agree, that you barely stand each other. But I
didn't know but you would prefer to be on good terms with her, for all
that."

"Miss Mae can choose the terms on which we meet. I shall be content
whatever her decision. What are your plans for the day?"

Lounging Eric straightened himself at once. "I was a perfect fool last
night," he confessed, "and I must rely on you, old fellow, to help me
out. I made engagements for two weeks ahead with Miss Hopkins and Miss
Rae. At any rate, I'm booked for the play to-night. Now, I can't take
two girls very well. That is, I can, but I thought you might like a
show. You may have your choice of the two. Miss Rae, by the way, says
she's wild to know you; thought you were the most provoking man she ever
saw; and that you were--nonsensical idea--engaged to Mae. All because
you wouldn't look at her the other day when she passed you two, But you
can go with Miss Hopkins, if you prefer."

"Are they pretty?" asked Norman, apparently warming to the task, "and
bright?"

"I should say they were. Miss Hopkins has gorgeous great eyes,--but Miss
Rae is more your style. Still, you may have your choice."

"Silly boy; you're afraid to death that I shall choose Miss Hopkins.
Well, if they are not over stupid and flirtatious--"

"Stupid! Oh, no,"--Eric scouted that idea--"and flirtatious, perhaps.
Miss Hopkins rolls her eyes a good deal, but then she has a frankness, a
winning way."

"Well," laughed Norman, "you're such a transparent, susceptible
infant-in-arms that I'll go with you."

"As shepherd," suggested Eric, "as long as Mae won't have you. But come,
we must go down and call on these people. It won't do at all for you to
appear suddenly this evening, and say, 'I'll relieve my friend here of
one of you.'"

"Oh, what a bore. Is that necessary? Won't a card or a box of Stillman's
bon-bons do them? Well, if it must be, come along, then."




CHAPTER V.


It was evening, and the brilliantly lighted theatre was crowded to
overflowing. Of course there were English who scowled at the Americans,
and Americans who smiled on every one and ate candy while Othello
writhed in jealous rage, and a scattering of Germans with spectacles and
a row of double-barrelled field glasses glued over them, and Frenchmen
with impudent eyes and elegant gloves, and a general filling in of
Italians, with the glitter here and there of nobility, and still oftener
of bright uniforms. Finally there was a modicum of true gentry, and
these not of any particular nation or class. It is pleasant to name our
party immediately after referring to these goodly folks. They had a fine
box, and although their ranks were thinned by the loss of two cavaliers,
nobody seemed to care. Albert and Edith were perfectly happy side by
side, and Mrs. Jerrold was well contented to observe her daughter's
smile as Albert spoke to her, and the look of manly protection in his
eyes, as his gaze met Edith's.

As for Mae, she had that delicious feminine pride which is as good
a stimulant as success to women--in emergencies. And to-night was an
emergency to this small, excitable, young thing. Her eyes were very dark
from the expansion of the pupil. They possessed a rare charm, caught
from a trick the eyelids had of drooping slowly and then suddenly
and unexpectedly lifting to reveal the wide, bright depths, that
half-concealed, half-revealed power, which is so tantalizing. Mae was
dressed in this same spirit to-night, and she was dimly conscious of it.
The masses of tulle that floated from her opera hat to her chin and down
on her shoulders, revealed only here and there a glimpse of rich brown
hair, or of white throat. Her cheeks were scarlet, her lips a-quiver
with excitement and pleasure. She formed a pretty contrast to Edith,
who sat by her side. Miss Jerrold leaned back in her chair quietly,
composedly. She fanned herself in long sweeps, looked pleased,
contented, but in no wise displaced or surprised--thoroughly well-bred
and at home. She might have had a private rehearsal of Othello in her
own dramatic hall the evening before, from her air and mien. Mae, on the
contrary, was alert, on the qui vive, as interested as a child in each
newcomer, and, after the curtain rose, in every tableau.

Such a woman can not fail to attract attention, as long as she is
herself unconscious. The world grows blase so speedily that it enjoys
all the more thoroughly the sight of freshness, verve, life,--that is,
the male portion of the world. Women's great desire, as a rule, is
to appear entirely at ease, city-bred, high-bred, used to all things,
surprised by none.

So there were a great many glasses turned toward Mae that evening.
Very probably the young women in the next box accepted a share of these
glances as their own, and, in a crowd where the French and Italian
elements predominate, or largely enter, they could not have been far
wrong. Every girl or woman who pretends to any possible charm is quite
sure of her share of admiration from these susceptible beings. The
young ladies of the next box had that indescribable New York air, which
extends from the carefully brushed eyebrows quite to the curves of the
wrist and hand. Praise Parisian modes all you will, but for genuine
style, a New York girl, softened a trifle by commonsense or good taste,
leads the world--certainly if she is abroad. For there she soon finds
it impossible to go to the extremes that American air seems to rush
her into. Three months, or perhaps, if she is observant, three days
in Paris, teach her that the very biggest buttons, or the very largest
paniers, or the very flaringest hats are not for her, or any lady,
and by stepping back to size number two, she does not detract from her
style, while she does add to her lady-likeness.

These two girls, it may be surmised, were no other than Miss Hopkins and
Miss Rae, whom chance or fate or bungling Eric Madden, who bought the
tickets, had seated side by side with the Maddens and Jerrolds. It was
bothersome, when Norman and Eric had played truant at any rate, but
there was no help for it; so after a little Eric introduced them all
round, and the two parties apparently merged into one, or broke up into
four, for tete-a-tetes soon began. It was a little hard that three girls
should have each a devoted servant, and that only one, and that one,
Mae, should be obliged to receive her care from the chaperon; but so it
was.

Nevertheless, Mae bore herself proudly. She was seated next Miss Rae,
separated only by the nominal barrier of a little railing, while just
beyond sat Norman, his chair turned toward the two girls. The stranger
insisted on drawing Mae into the conversation, partly for curiosity's
sake, to watch her odd face and manners, partly from that genuine
generosity that comes to the most selfish of women, when she is
satisfied with her position. It is pleasant to pity, to be generous; and
Miss Rae, having the man, could afford to share him now and then, when
it pleased her, with the lonely girl by her side. But Miss Rae's tactics
did not work. Mae replied pleasantly when addressed, but returned
speedily and eagerly to Mrs. Jerrold or a survey of the house, with
the frank happiness of a child. She was all the more fascinating to the
admiring eyes that watched her, because she sat alone, electrified by
the inspiration and magnetism from within, and did not need the stimulus
of another voice close by her side, breathing compliments and flattery,
to brighten her eyes and call the blushes to her cheeks. Norman Mann saw
the eyes fixed on her, and they vexed him. At the same time, he liked
her the better on that very account.

And at last the curtain rose.

It was just as Desdemona assures her father of her love for Othello,
that Mae became conscious of a riveted gaze--of a presence. Lifting her
eyes, and widening them, she looked over to the opposite side of
the house, and there, of course, was the Piedmontese officer again,
handsomer, more brilliant than ever, with a grateful, soft look of
recognition in his eyes.

Mae was out of harmony with all her friends. She was proud and lonely.
The man's pleased, softened look touched her heart strangely. There was
almost a choke in her throat, there were almost tears in her eyes, and
there was a free, glad, welcoming smile on her lips.

Norman Mann saw it and followed it, and caught the officer receiving it,
and thought "She's a wild coquette."

And Mae knew what he saw and what he thought.

Then a strange spirit entered the girl. Here was a man who vexed her,
who piqued her, and who was rude, for Mae secretly thought it was rude
to neglect Mrs. Jerrold, as the boys did that evening, and yet who was
vexed and piqued in his turn, if she did what he didn't like and looked
at another man.

And then here was the other man. Mae looked down at him.

Bless us! who is to blame a young woman for forgetting everything but
the "other man" when he is a godlike Piedmontese officer, with strong
soft cheek and throat, and Italian eyes, and yellow moustaches, and
spurs and buttons that click and shine in a maddening sort of way?

Of course, in reality, everybody is to blame her, we among the very
virtuous first. In this particular case, however, we have facts, not
morals, to deal with. Mae did see Norman Mann talking delightedly to a
pretty girl, and she did see the officer gazing at her rapturously, and
she quite forgot Othello, and gave back look for look, only more shy and
less intense perhaps, and knew that Norman Mann was very angry and she
and the officer very happy. What matter though the one should hate her,
and the other love her, and she--

But, bother all things but the delirious present moment. Never fear
consequences. There were bright lights, and brilliant people, the hum of
many voices, the flash of many eyes, and a half secret between her, this
little creature up in the box, and the very handsomest man of them all.

So while Othello fell about the stage, and ground out tremendous curses,
Mae half shivered and glanced tremblingly toward Bero, and Bero
gazed back protectingly and grandly. Once, when Desdemona cried
out thrillingly, "Othello, il mio marito," Mae looked at Norman
involuntarily and caught a half flash of his eye, but he turned back
quickly to his companion and Mae's glance wandered on to Bero and rested
there as the wild voice cried out again, "il mio marito, il mio marito."

So the evening slid on. Mae smiled and smiled and opened and half closed
her eyes, and Norman invited Miss Rae to go to church with him, and to
drive with him, and to walk with him, and to go to the galleries with
him, "until, Susie Hopkins, if you will believe it, I fairly thought he
would drop on his knees and ask me to go through life with him, right
then and there." So Miss Rae confided to Susie Hopkins after the
victorious night, in the silence of a fourth-story Costanzi bedroom.

Susie Hopkins was putting her hair up on crimping-pins, but she paused
long enough to say: "Well, Jack Durkee had better hurry himself and his
ring along, then."

"O, he's coming as quickly as ever he can," laughed Miss Rae, whereat
she proceeded to place a large letter and a picture under the left-hand
pillow, crimped her hair, cold-creamed her lips, and laid her down to
pleasant dreams of--Jack.



CHAPTER VI.


Mae was very much ashamed of herself the next morning. She had been
restored in a measure to popular favor, through Eric, the day before.
Edith and Albert were home from Frascati, when Eric made his raid
bravely on their forces combined with those of Mrs. Jerrold. He advanced
boldly. "It's all nonsense, child, as she is," he said. "It was natural
enough, to talk with the man," for Mae had made a clean breast of her
misdoings to him, to the extent of saying that they had chatted after
the beggar left. "Do forgive her, poor little proud tot, away across the
sea from her mother. Albert, you're as hard as a rock, and that Edith
has no spirit in her," he added, under his breath. This remark made
Albert white with rage. Nevertheless, he put in a plea for his wayward,
reckless little sister, with effect. After a few more remarks from Mrs.
Jerrold, Mae came out of the ordeal; was treated naturally, and, as we
have seen, accompanied Mrs. Jerrold to the play the night before.

Now, it was the next day. Mrs. Jerrold breakfasted in her own room
again, and spent the hours in writing home letters full of the Peter
and Paul reminiscences and quotations. Norman and Eric left for the
Costanzi, and Albert and Edith, armed with books, and note-books, and
the small camp-stools, again started away together. This last 'again'
was getting to be accepted quite as a matter of course. Everybody knew
what it meant. They always invited the rest of the company to go
with them, and were especially urgent, this morning, that Mae should
accompany them.

"Why, with mamma in her room you will be lonely," suggested Edith, "and
you can't go out by yourself."

Mae winced inwardly at this, but replied pleasantly: "I have letters to
write also, and I'm not in the mood to-day for pictures, and the cold,
chilling galleries filled with the damp breath of the ages."

So Edith and Albert, nothing loth, having discharged their duty, started
off. These two have as yet appeared only in the background, and may
have assumed a half-priggish air in opposition and contrast to Mae.
They really, however, were very interesting young people. Albert with
a strong desire in his heart--or was it in his head?--to aid the world,
and Edith with a clear self-possession and New England shrewdness that
helped and pleased him. Their travels were enriching them both. Edith
was trying to draw the soul from all the great pictures and some of the
lesser ones, and Albert was waking, through her influence, to the world
of art. This morning they were on their way to the Transfiguration to
study the scornful sister. They were taking the picture bit by bit,
color by color, face by face. There are advantages in this analytical
study, yet there is a chance of losing the spirit of the whole. So Mae
thought and said: "I know that sister now, Edith, better than you ever
will." This was while she was looping up her friend's dress here,
and pulling out a fold there, in that destructive way girls have of
beautifying each other. "See here!"

And down sank Miss Mae on her knees, with her lips curved, and her hands
stretched out imploringly, half-mockingly. No need of words to say:
"Save my brother, behold him. Ah, you cannot do it, your power is boast.
Yet, save him, pray."

"A little more yellow in my hair, some pearls and a pink gown, and you
might have the sister to study in a living model, Edith," laughed Mae,
arising.

Edith and Albert were both struck by Mae's dramatic force, and they
talked of her as they drove to the Vatican. "I wish I understood her
better," said Edith. "I cannot feel as if travel were doing her good.
She is changing so; she was always odd, but then she was always happy.
Now she has her moods, and there is a look in her eye I am afraid of. It
is almost savage. You would think the beauty in Rome would delight her
nature, for she craves beauty and poetry in everything. I don't believe
the theatre is good for her. Albert, suppose we give up our tickets for
Thursday night."

"But you want particularly to see that play, Edith."

"I can easily give it up for Mae's sake. It would be cruel to go without
her, and I think excitement is bad for her."

"You are very generous, Edith, and right, too, I dare say. I wish my
little sister could see pleasure and duty through your steadier, clearer
eyes."

Then the steady, clear eyes dropped suddenly, and the two forgot all
about Mae, and rolled contentedly off, behind the limping Italian
horse. And the red-cheeked vetturino with the flower in his button-hole,
whistled a love-song, and thought of his Piametta, I suppose.

Meantime, Mae, left to herself, grew penitent and reckless by turns,
blushed alternately with shame and with quick pulse-beats, as she
remembered Norman Mann's face, or the officer's smile. She wondered
where he lived, and whether she would see him soon again. Poor child!
She was really innocent, and only dimly surmised how he would haunt her
hereafter. Would he look well in citizen's clothes? How would Norman
Mann seem in his uniform? She wished she had a jacket cut like his. And
so on in an indolent way. But penitence was getting the better of her,
and after vainly trying to read or write, she settled herself down for
a cry. To think that she, Mae Madden, could have acted so absurdly. She
never would forgive herself, never. Then she cried some more, a good
deal more.

About four in the afternoon a very bright sunbeam peeped through her
closed blinds, and she brushed away her tears, and peace came back to
her small heart, and she felt like a New England valley after a shower,
very fresh and clean, and goodly,--just a trifle subdued, however.

She would go to church. She had heard that there was lovely music at
vespers, in the little church at the foot of Capo le Case. St. Andrea
delle Frate, was it? It wasn't very far away. She could say her prayers
and repent entirely and wholly. So she dressed rapidly, singing the
familiar old Te Deum joyously all the while, and off she started.

The air was cool and clear and delicious and the street-scenes were
pretty. Mae took in everything before her as she left the house, from
the Barberini fountain to the groups of models at the corner of the
Square and the Via Felice; but she did not see, at some distance
behind her, on the opposite side of the street, the sudden start of a
motionless figure as she left the house, or know that it straightened
itself and moved along as she did, turning on to the pretty Via Sistina,
so down the hill at Capo le Case, to the church below.

She was early for vespers, and there was only the music singing in her
own happy little heart as she entered the quiet place. The contrast
between the spot, with its shrines and symbols and aids to faith, and
all that she had associated with religion, conspired to separate her
from herself and her past, and left her a bit of breathing, worshiping
life, praising the great Giver of Life. She fell on her knees in an
exalted, jubilate spirit. She was more like a Praise-the-Lord psalm of
David than like a young girl of the nineteenth century.

And yet close behind her, a little to the left, was Bero on his knees
too, at his pater nosters.

By and by the music began. It was music beyond description; those
wonderful male voices, the chorus of young boys, and then suddenly, the
organ and some one wild falsetto carrying the great Latin soul-laden
words up higher.

All this while Mae's head was bent low and her heart was a-praying.

All this while Bero was on his knees also, but his eyes were on Mae.

The music ceased; the prayers were ended. Mae heard indistinctly the
sweep of trailing skirts, the sound of footsteps on the marble floor,
the noise of voices as the people went away, but still she did not move.
The selah pause had come after the psalm.

When she did rise, and turn, and start to go, her eyes fell on the
kneeling form. She tried to pass quickly without recognition, but he
reached out his hand.

"This is a church," said Mae; "my prayers are sacred; do not disturb
me."

He held his rosary toward her, with the cross at the end tightly clasped
in his hand. "My prayers are here, too," he said. "Oh, Signorina, give
me one little prayer, one of your little prayers."

He knelt before her in the quiet, dim, half light, his hands clasped,
and an intense earnestness in his easily moved Italian soul, that
floated up to his face. It looked like beautiful penitence and faith
to Mae. Here was a soul in sympathy with hers, one which met her
harmoniously in every mood, slid into her dreams and wild wishes,
sparkled with her enjoyment, and now knelt as she knelt, and asked for
one of her prayers.

She stood a minute irresolute. Then she smiled down on him a full, rich
smile, and said in English: "God bless you," The next moment she was
gone.

Bero made no movement to follow her, but remained quietly on his knees,
his head bowed low.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I looked in at St. Andrea's, at vespers," said that dear, bungling
fellow, Eric, at dinner that night, "and saw you Mae, but you were so
busy with your prayers I came away." There was a pause, and Mae knew
that people looked at her.

"Yes, I was there; the music was wonderful."

"Mae," asked Mrs. Jerrold, "Do you have to go to a Roman Catholic Church
to say your prayers?" For Mrs. Jerrold was a Puritan of the Puritans,
and had breathed in the shorter catechism and the doctrine of election
with the mountain air and sea-salt of her childhood. Possibly the two
former had had as much to do as the latter with her angularity and
severe strength.

"Indeed," cried Mae, impulsively, "I wish I could always enter a church
to say my prayers. There is so much to help one there."

"Is there any danger of your becoming a Romanist?" enquired Mrs.
Jerrold, pushing the matter further.

"I wish there were a chance of my becoming anything half as good, but I
am afraid there isn't. Still, I turn with an occasional loyal heart-beat
to the great Mother Church, that the rest of you have all run away
from." "Yes, you have," Mae shook her head decidedly at Edith. "She may
be a cruel mother. I know you all think she's like the old woman
who lived in a shoe, and that she whips her children and sends them
supperless to bed, and gives them a stone for bread, but she's the
mother of all of us, notwithstanding."

"What a dreadful mixture of Mother Goose and Holy Bible," exclaimed
Eric, laughingly, while Mae cooled off, and Mrs. Jerrold stared
amazedly, wondering how to take this tirade. She concluded at last that
it would be better to let it pass as one of Mae's extravagances, so she
ended the conversation by saying: "I hope, Eric, you will wait for your
sister, if you see her alone, at church. It is not the thing for her to
go by herself."

"No," added Albert, "we shall have to buy a chain for you soon."

"If you do," said Mae quietly, "I'll slip it." And not another prayer
did she say that night.



CHAPTER VII.


It was the first day of Carnival. The determination to enjoy herself
was so strong in Mae, that her face fairly shone with her "good time
coming." She popped her head out of the doorway, and flung a big handful
of confetti right at Eric, but he dodged, and Norman Mann caught it in
his face. Then, seeing a try-to-be-dignified look creeping upon Mae, he
seized the golden moment, gathered up such remnants of confetti as were
tangled in his hair and whiskers, and flung them back again, shouting:
"Long live King Pasquino! So his reign has begun, has it?"

"Yes; King Pasquino is lord, now, for ten whole days," and she slowly
edged her right hand about, to take aim again at Norman. He saw her, and
frustrated the attempt by catching it and emptying the contents out
upon the floor. The little white balls rolled off to the corners and the
little hand fell slowly by Mae's side. "Why not go down to the Corso,
you and I, and see the beginning of the fun?" suggested Norman.

"Come along," cried Mae, "you, too, Eric," and the three started off
like veritable children, in a delightful, familiar, old-time way.
Arrived at their loggia, they found an old woman employed in filling,
with confetti, a long line of boxes, fastened to the balustrade of the
balcony. Little shovels, also, were provided, for dealing out the tiny
missals of war upon the heads below. There were masks in waiting, some
to be tied on, while others terminated in a handle, by a skilful use of
which they could be made as effective as a Spanish lady's fan. Mae chose
one of these latter.

The Corso was alive with vendors of small bouquets and bon-bons and
little flying birds tied in live agony to round yellow oranges. The
fruit in turn was fastened to a long pole and so thrust up to the
balconies as a tempting bait. If bought, the birds and flowers were
tossed together into the streets to a passing friend. As Mae was gazing
rapturously over the balcony, laughing at the few stragglers hurrying
to the Piazza del Popolo, admiring the bannered balconies and gay
streamers, several of these little birds were thrust up to her face,
some of them peeping piteously and flapping their poor wings. She put up
her hands and caught the oranges, one--two--three--four. In a moment
she had freed the fluttering birds and tossed the fruit back into the
street. "Pay them, Eric," she cried indignantly; "Why, what is this?"
for one of the little creatures, after vainly flapping its wings, had
fallen on the balcony. Mae picked it up. It half opened its eyes at her
and then lay still in her hands.

"It is dead," said Mae, quietly, going up to Norman. "Oh! Mr. Mann, I
thought Carnival meant real fun, not cruelty. Isn't there anywhere in
this big world where we can get free from such dreadful things? Well!"
she added, impatiently, as Norman paused.

"Give a slow fellow who likes the world better than you do, time to
apologize for it," replied Norman, as familiarly as Eric would have
done. The tone pleased Mae. She looked up and laughed lightly. "At any
rate," suggested he, "let's forget the cruelty now and take the fun.
Three of them are safe and very likely this scrap," and he touched
the dead bird in her hand, "is flying to rejoin his brothers in
hunting-grounds that are stocked with angle-worms, and such game. We are
to have a good time to-day, you and I."

At this moment Eric rushed up. "Say, Mann," he cried, "here they come.
They have taken the balcony just opposite, after all. And Miss Hopkins
looks perfectly in a white veil. And oh! here are the rest of our own
party."

Mae lifted her eyes to the opposite side of the street, but they did not
fall to the level of the Hopkins-Rae party, being stopped by something
above. At a high, fourth-story window, beyond the circle of flying fun
and frolic, confetti and flowers, Mae saw a wonderful woman's face, a
face with great dark eyes and raven hair. A heavily-figured white lace
veil was pulled low over her brow, and fell in folds against her cheeks.
Her skin was white, the scarlet of her face concentrating in her lips.

There was a strange consonance between the creamy heavy lace and its
flowing intertwined figures, and the face it encircled. A mystery, a
grace, a subtle charm, that had the effect of a vivid dream, in its
combination of clearness and unreality. There was life, with smothered
passion and pride and pain in it, Mae was sure. So near to her that her
voice could have arched the little distance easily, and yet so far away
from her life and all that touched it.

A gentleman attending the lady whispered to her. She bent her eyes on
Mae, and met her glance with a smile, and Mae smiled rapturously back.

Mae had been looking for Bero all that afternoon. She felt sure he would
be there, and very soon she saw him among a crowd of officers sauntering
slowly down the Corso. He looked up at the window opposite. The veiled
lady leaned slightly forward and bowed and waved her white hand. Bero
bowed. So did the other officers.

Norman Mann and Eric excused themselves long enough to dash over to
welcome their friends and then stayed on for a little chat. These young
women were quite gorgeous in opera cloaks and tiny, nearly invisible,
American flags tucked through their belts. They tossed confetti down on
every one's heads, and shouted--a little over-enthusiastically, but one
can pardon even gush if it is only genuine. That was the question in
this case.

The horse race came; and Mae went fairly wild. When it was over, every
body prepared to go home. King Pasquino had virtually abdicated in favor
of the Dinner Kings. Mae unclasped her tightly strained hands, clambered
down from a chair she had perched herself on, smiled a good-bye at the
veiled lady, and came away. She rode home quietly with a big bouquet of
exquisite blue violets in her hand. There was a rose on top and a fringe
of maiden's hair at the edge, and the bouquet was flung from Bero's own
hand up at the side window on the quiet Jesu e Maria, when everyone else
but Mae was out on the Corso balcony.

"It is dreadful to grow old," said Mae, breaking silence, as the
carriage clattered over the stony streets.

"My dear," expostulated Edith, "you surely don't call yourself old. What
do you mean?"

"I fancied I could take the Carnival as a child takes a big bonbon and
just think with a smack of the lips, 'My! how good this is.' But here
I am, wondering what my candy is made of all the time, and forgetting,
except at odd moments, to enjoy myself for trying to separate false from
true, and gold from gilt. Still, what is the use of this stuff now! I'll
remember that horse race, for there I did forget myself and everything
but motion. How I would like to be a horse!" And the volatile Mae seized
the stems of her bouquet for whip and bridle and gave a little inelegant
expressive click-click to her lips as if she were spurring that
imaginary steed herself.

Norman smiled. "We can't keep children for ever, even--"

"The silliest of us?"

"Even the freshest and blithest."

"O, dear, that is like a moral to a Sunday-school book," said Mae;
"don't be goody-goody to-night."

"What bad thing shall I do to please your majesty, my lady Pasquino?"

"Waltz," said Mae. So, after dinner, Edith and Eric sang, and Norman and
Mae took to the poetry of motion as ducks take to water, and outdanced
the singers.

"Thank you," said Mae, smiling up at him. "This has done me good." She
pushed the brown hair back from her forehead and drew some deep breaths
and leaned back in her chair, still tapping her eager, half-tired foot
against the floor, while Norman fanned her with his handkerchief.

This time Bero and the strange, veiled lady and Miss Hopkins and
every other confusing thought floated off, and left them quite happy
for--well--say for ten minutes.

And ten minutes consecutive enjoyment is worth waiting for, old and
cynical people say.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next morning brought back all her troubles, with variations and
complications, on account of some more misunderstood words.

"I think," said Mae, as she paused to blot the tenth page of a home
letter, "that likes and dislikes are very similar, don't you, Edith?"
Then, as Edith did not reply, she glanced up, and saw that her friend's
chair was occupied by Norman Mann. He looked up also and smiled.

"I am not Edith, you see, but I am interested in your theory all the
same. Only, as I am a man, I shall require you to show up your reasons."

"Well, I find that people who affect me very intensely either way, I
always feel intuitively acquainted with. I know what they will think and
how they will act under given conditions, and I believe we are driven
into friendship or strong dislikes more by the force of circumstances
than by--"

"Elective affinities or any of that nonsense," suggested Norman Mann.

"Yes," said Mae, nodding her head, and repeating her original
statement under another form, as a sort of conclusion and proof to the
conversation. "Yes, a natural acquaintance may develop into your best
friend or your worst foe." She started on page number eleven of her
letter, dipping her pen deep into the ink-stand and giving such a
particular flourish to her right arm, as to nearly upset the bouquet of
flowers at her side. It was Bero's gift. Norman Mann put out his hand
to save it. His fingers fell in among the soft flowers and touched
something stiff. It felt like a little roll of paper. Indignantly and
surprisedly he pulled it out. "What is this?" he cried.

Mae sprang forward, her cheeks aflame. "It is mine," she said.

"Did you put it here?" asked Norman.

"No."

"Then how do you know it is yours? Is not this a carnival bouquet, idly
tossed from the street to the balcony?"

Mae straightened to her utmost height which wasn't lofty then and said
hastily: "Mr. Mann, this is utterly absurd, and more. I am not a child,
and if I catch an idly flung bouquet that holds idle secrets, I
surely have a right to them." She laughed hurriedly. "Come, give me my
note,--some Italian babble, I dare say."

Norman looked at her for a minute with a struggle in his heart and a
flash of half scorn, Mae thought, on his face. What was he thinking?

That the child was in danger. He had no doubt in his own mind now that
the flowers and the note came from Bero and that Mae knew it. He held
the paper crushed in his hand, while he looked at her.

"I presume you will never forgive me," he said, "but I must warn you,
not as a mentor or even as a friend," noticing her annoyed air, "but as
one soul is bound to warn another soul, seeing it in danger. Take care
of yourself, and there!" And taking the crushed note between his two
hands, he deliberately tore it asunder and threw the halves on the table
before her.

"And there, and there, and there!" cried Mae, tearing the fragments
impetuously, and scattering the sudden little snow flakes before him.
Then, with a look of supreme contempt, she left the room.

Norman looked down on the white heap that lay peacefully at his feet. "I
am a fool," he thought.

"Little Mae Madden, little Mae Madden, I am so sorry for you," repeated
that excited bit of womankind to herself in the silence of her own room.
"What won't they drive you to yet? How dreadful they think you are? And
only last night we thought things were all coming around beautifully!"

And she looked at herself pityingly in the glass. A mirror is a
dangerous thing for a woman who has come to pity herself. She sees the
possibilities of her face too clearly. And Mae, looking into the mirror
then, realized to an extent she never had before, that her eyes and
mouth might be powerful friends to herself and foes to Norman Mann,
if she so desired. And to-day she did so desire, and went down to the
Carnival with as reckless and dangerous a spirit as good King Pasquino
could have asked.

The details of this day were very like those of the last. Norman and
Eric vibrated between the Madden and Hopkins balconies; the crowd was
great; confetti and flowers filled the air; and up above it all,
circled by her crown of misty, heavy lace-work, shone out the beautiful,
wonderful face of the strange lady. She dropped smiles from under her
long black lashes and from the corners of the rare, sweet mouth over
the heads of the idlers to Mae, who looked up to catch them. There was
a resting, almost saving influence, Mae's excited soul believed, in
the strange face; and her eyes sought it constantly. She had been quite
oblivious to the friends about this beautiful stranger, but once, as
her eyes sought the Italian's, she saw her arise with a sudden flash of
light on her face, and hold out a white hand. A head bent over it, and
as it lifted itself slowly, Mae saw once more the well-known features of
the Signor Bero.

She looked down toward the street quickly and a sharp pain filled her
heart.

She had lost her only friend in Rome, so the silly girl said to herself.
If he knew that wonderful woman, and if she flashed those weary, great
eyes for him, how could he see or think of any other? Moreover, it was
very vexatious to have him there. If she smiled up at the girl, Bero
might think she was watching him, trying to attract his notice. So Mae
appeared very careless and played she did not see him at all, at all.
Yet she could not resist looking up now and then for one of the rare
smiles. They seemed like very far between "nows and thens" to Mae,
averaging possibly a distance of four minutes apart. But that is as one
counts time by steady clock-ticks, and not by heart-beats.

Meanwhile, what could she do with her eyes? They would wander once in a
while over to the opposite balcony, at just such moments as when Norman
Mann was picking up Miss Rae's fan and receiving her thanks for it from
under her drooped eyelids, or choosing a flower for himself, "the very,
very prettiest, Mr. Mann," before she threw the rest to the winds and
the passing gallants.

As Mae grew reckless her eyes grew bright. There were few passers-by who
were not attracted by the flash of those eyes. The sailor lads, as they
trundled past in their ship on wheels, left the barrels of lime from
which they had been pelting the pleasure-seekers to throw whole
handfuls of flowers up to the Jesu e Maria balcony; a set of hale young
Englishmen picked out their prettiest bonbons for the same purpose;
and one elderly, pompous man, who drove unmasked and with staring opera
glasses up and down the Corso, quite showered her with bouquets, which
he threw so poorly, and with such a shaky old hand, that the street
gamins caught them all except such as he craftily flung so that they
might assuredly tumble back to the carriage again. And Mae, though she
had felt the pleased gaze of a good many eyes before, had never quite
put its meaning plainly to herself. She was apt, on such occasions, to
feel high-spirited, excited, joyous, but now she realized well that she
was being admired, and she led on for victory ardently.

She tossed back little sprays of flowers, or quiet bonbons, or now and
then mischievously let drop a sprinkling of confetti balls through her
half-closed fingers. To do this she drooped her hand low over among
the balcony trimmings, following the soft shower with her eyes, as
some straight soldier would wipe the tiny minie balls from his face and
glance up to see where they came from. If he looked up once, he never
failed to look again, and generally darted around the nearest corner
to return with his offering, in the shape of flowers or other pretty
carnival nonsense. Mae rather satisfied her conscience, which was
tolerably fast asleep for the time being, at any rate, with the fact
that she didn't smile at these strangers--she only looked!

Her pleasure was heightened by the knowledge that she was watched. If
she glanced across quickly, Miss Rae's eyes were invariably fixed on her
and Norman Mann would be gazing in the opposite direction in the most
suspicious manner. From above her strange friend leaned over admiringly
and once, as Mae looked joyously upwards, clapped her white hands softly
together, while beyond her a tall figure stood motionless, Mae had
pretended not to see Bero yet, but as the Italian applauded her in this
gentle manner, her eyes sought his involuntarily. He was gazing very
fixedly and rapturously down on her, without any apparent thought of the
beautiful girl by his side. After that, Mae looked up often, in a glad,
childlike way, for spite of this first lesson in wholesale coquetry, and
the new conflict of emotions within her mind, she was enjoying herself
with the utter abandon of her glad nature.

Toward the close of the afternoon, the Italian was suddenly surrounded
by a great mass of flowers, over which she waved her hand caressingly
and pointed down at Mae. "For you," the gesture seemed to say. The
veiled lady appeared to summon several of her friends, for a number of
gentlemen left the other window and its group of girls, and began the
difficult task of attempting to toss the bouquets from their height down
to Mae. This was rendered the more difficult as the Madden balcony was
covered, and the best shots succeeded in landing their trophies on this
awning, where they were speedily captured and drawn in by the occupants
of the next flat, an ogre of an old woman and her hook-nosed daughter,
who wore an ugly green dress and was otherwise unattractive.

The entire Madden party became interested and stood looking on with
the most encouraging smiles. The very last bouquet was vainly thrown,
however, and gathered in by the ogre, when Bero suddenly appeared, a
little behind the party in the window. The flowers in his hand were of
the same specimens as those he had given Mae the day before, although
different in arrangement. He lifted the bouquet quickly to his lips,
so quickly that perhaps only Mae understood the motion, and flung it
lightly forward. Mae leaned over the balcony, reaching out her eager
hands, and caught it in her very finger tips. The party above bowed and
applauded, as she raised the flowers triumphantly to her face.

So the second day of the Carnival was a success, till they turned their
backs on the Corso. In the carriage Mrs. Jerrold spoke gently but firmly
to Mae. "Be a little more careful, dear; don't let your spirits carry
you quite away during these mad days." Mae smiled, but was silent.

"What a strangely beautiful girl that was in the gallery opposite,"
Edith said, a moment later. "I wonder if she is engaged to that superb
man; I fancied I had seen him before. Why, Mae, what in the world are
you blushing at?" For Mae's face was scarlet. "Why, nothing," replied
Mae, redder yet; "nothing at all. What do you mean?"

The same thought occurred to Edith and Albert. The officer was Mae's
chance acquaintance. They both looked grave, and Albert remarked: "It is
as well to be careful before getting up too sudden an acquaintance with
your Italian girl. Take care of your eyes."

"Has it come to this?" cried Mae, half jestingly, half bitterly. "Are
nor my very eyes my own? I shall feel, Albert, as if you were trying to
bind me in that chain you threatened," and Mae started: her fingers had
felt another scrap of paper among the flowers, but she did not drop it
from the carriage, as her first impulse was; she held it tight and close
in her warm right hand until she was fairly at home and safe in her own
room. Then she opened and read in an Italian hand, "To my little Queen
of the Carnival."

Could he have written that as he stood by the wonderful veiled lady,
with her white mysterious beauty, with the purple shadows about her dark
eyes, while she--and Mae looked in her glass again. What did she see?
Certainly a different picture, but a picture for all that. Life and
color and youth, a-tremble and a-quiver in every quick movement of her
face, in the sudden lifting of the eyelids, the swift turn of the lips,
the litheness and carelessness of every motion; above and beyond all,
the picture possessed that rare quality which some artist has declared
to be the highest beauty, that picturesque charm which shines from
within, that magnetic flash and quiver which comes and goes "ere one can
say it lightens."

The veiled lady's face was stranger, more mysterious, to an artistic or
an imaginative mind; but youth, and intense life, and endless variety
usually carry the day with a man's captious heart, and so Bero called
Mae

     "My little Queen of the Carnival."



CHAPTER VIII.


Mae's good times were greatly dimmed after this by the thought that she
was watched. The bouquets which came daily from Bero troubled her also
not a little. They were invariably formed of the same flowers, and might
easily attract Edith's attention and possible suspicion. So she
stayed home from the Corso one day not long after, when she was in
a particularly Corso-Carnival mood. She wandered helplessly about,
restless and full of desire to be down at the balcony with the rest. And
such a strange thing is the human heart, that it was Norman Mann's face
she saw before her constantly, and she found Miss Rae's little twinkling
sort of eyes far more haunting than those of her veiled friend.

The rich life in Mae's blood was surging in her veins and must be let
off in some way. If she had had her music and a piano she might have
thrown her soul into some great flood-waves of harmony. The Farnesina
frescoes of Cupid and Psyche over across the Tiber would have helped
her, but here she was alone, and so she did what so many "fervent souls"
do--scribbled her heart out in a colorful, barbarous rhyme. Mae had
ordinarily too good sense for this, too deep a reverence for that world
of poetry, at the threshold of which one should bow the knee, and loose
the shoe from his foot, and tread softly. She didn't care for this
to-day. She plunged boldly in, wrote her verse, copied it, sent it to
a Roman English paper, and heard from it again two days later, in the
following way.

The entire party were breakfasting together, when Albert suddenly looked
up from his paper and laughed. "Look here," he cried. "Here is another
of those dreadful imitators of the Pre-Raphaelite school. Hear this from
a so-called poem in the morning's journal:

     'The gorgeous brown reds
     Of the full-throated creatures of song.'"

"I don't see anything bad in that," said Eric, helping himself to
another muffin. "What is the matter with you?"

"Matter enough," returned Albert. "Because their masters, sometimes,
daub on colors with their full palettes and strong brushes, this feeble
herd tag after them and flounder around in color and passion in a way
that is sickening."

"Go on," shouted Eric, "he is our own brother, Mae, after all, you see.
Fancy my Lord Utilitarian turning to break a lance in defence of beauty.
Edith, you and the picture-galleries are to blame for this."

Mae had been paying great attention to her rolls and coffee, and very
little apparently to the conversation, but she spoke eagerly now.
"Their masters do not daub. They do hold palettes full of the strongest,
richest colors, and dare lay them, in vivid flecks, on their canvas.
They do not care if they may offend some modern cultivated eyes, used
only to the invisible blues and shadowy greens and that host of cold,
lifeless, toneless grays, of refined conventional art. They know well
enough that their satisfying reds and browns and golds of rich, free
nature will go to the beating hearts of some of us."

Mae had a way of dashing into conversation abruptly, and the Madden
family had been brought up on argument and table-talk. So the rest of
the party ate their breakfast placidly enough. "Mae's right," said Eric,
a trifle grandly, "only, to change the figure of speech for one better
fitted for the occasion, they may satiate, though they never starve you.
But they are wonderfully fine, sometimes. O, bother, I never can
quote, but there is something about 'I will go back to the great sweet
mother."'

"Or this," suggested Mae,

     "'And to me thou art matchless and fair
     As the tawny sweet twilight, with blended
     Sunlight and red stars in her hair.'"

"I love my masters," continued this young enthusiast, "because they
fling all rules aside, and cry out as they choose. It is their very
heart's blood and the lusty wine of life that they give you, not just
a scrap of 'rosemary for remembrance' and a soothing herb-tea made
from the flowers of fancy they have culled from those much travestied,
abominable fields of thought."

"And this from a lover of Wordsworth, who holds the 'Daffodils' and
'Lucy' as her chief jewels, and quotes the 'Immortality' perpetually!"
cried Eric. "If any body ever wandered up and down those same fields of
thought, by more intricate, labyrinthine passages and byways, I'd
like to know of him. Talk about soothing herbs, bless me, it's hot
catnip-tea, good and strong, that he serves up in half of his strings
about--"

"O, Eric, hush," cried Mae, "I am afraid for you with such words on your
lips. Think of Ananias."

"Before you children go wandering off on one of your poet fights," broke
in Albert, "let me take you to task, Mae, for stealing; that lusty wine
you talked of just now is in the poem (?) I hold in my hand."

"Do read it to us," said Edith, "and let us judge for ourselves." So
Albert began:


ALL ON A SUMMER'S DAY.

      "Far away the mountains rise, purpling and joyous,
     Through the half mist of the warm pulsing day, while nigh
     At hand gay birds hang swinging and floating
     And waving betwixt earth and sky,
       Ringing out from ripe throats
       A sensuous trickling of notes,
     That fall through the trees,
     Till caught by the soft-rocking breeze
         They are borne to the ears of the maiden.

       Her eyes wander after the sound,
     And glimpses she catches along
       Through green broad-leaved shadows,
     Through sunbeams gold-strong,
     Of the gorgeous brown reds of the full-throated creatures of song.
       One hand on her brown bosom rests,
     Rising and falling with every heart-beat
       Of the delicate, slow-swelling breasts.

       A lily, proud, all color of amber and wine,
       Waves peerless there, by right divine
     Queen o'er the moment and place.
       As the wind bends her coaxingly,
       Brushes softly the maiden's white hand--
     That falls with an idle grace,
       Listlessly closed at her side--
       With a rippling touch, such as the tide,
     Rising, leaves on a summer day,
     On the quiet shore of some peaceful bay.

     There she stands in the heavily-bladed grass,
       Under the trumpet-vine,
     Drinking long, deep, intoxicate draughts
       Of Nature's lusty, live wine.
     There he sees her as he approaches;
       Then pauses, as full on his ear
       There swells, on a sudden, loud and clear,
         A wonderful burst of song.

       A mad delicious glory; a rainbow rhythm of life,
       Strong and young and free, a burst of the senses all astrife,
         Each one fighting to be first,
     While above, beyond them all,
     Loud a woman's heart makes call."

"Now, fire ahead," said Eric, "get your stones ready. Mrs. Jerrold, pray
begin; let us put down this young parrot with her 'lusty, live wine.'"

"Her?" exclaimed Edith. "Him, you mean."

"Not a bit of it; a woman wrote that, didn't she?"

Eric was very confident. Norman agreed with him, and he glanced at Mae
to discover her opinion. There was a look of secret amusement in her
face, and a dim suspicion entered his mind, which decided him to watch
her closely.

"Well," said Mrs. Jerrold, "I will be lenient. You children may throw
all the stones. It is not poetry to my taste. There's no metre to it,
and I should certainly be sorry to think a woman wrote it."

"Why?" asked Mae, quickly, almost commandingly. Norman glanced at her.
There was a tiny rosebud on each cheek.

"Because," replied Mrs. Jerrold, "it is too--too what, Edith?"

"Physical, perhaps," suggested Edith.

"It is a satyr-like sort of writing," suggested Norman.

"I should advise this person," said Edith--

"To keep still?" interrupted Eric.

"No, to go to work; that is what he or she needs."

"That is odd advice," said Mae; "suppose she--or he--is young, doesn't
know what to do, is a traveler, like ourselves, for instance."

"There are plenty of benevolent schemes in Rome, I am sure," said Edith,
a trifle sanctimoniously.

"And there's study," said Albert, "art or history. Think what a chance
for studying them one has here. Yes, Edith is right--work or study, and
a general shutting up of the fancy is what this mind needs."

"I disagree with you entirely," said Norman with energy. "She needs
play, relaxation, freedom." Then he was sorry he had said it; Mae's eyes
sparkled so.

"She needs," said Eric, pushing back his chair, "to be married. She is
in love. That's what's the matter. Read those two last lines, Albert:

     'While above, beyond them all,
     Loud a woman's heart makes call.'

"Don't you see?"

"O, wise young man," laughed Edith. But Mae arose. The scarlet buds in
her cheeks flamed into full-blown roses. "There speaks the man," she
cried passionately, "and pray doesn't a woman's heart ever call for
anything but love--aren't life and liberty more than all the love in the
world? Oh!" and she stopped abruptly.

"Well, we have wasted more time than is worth while over this young,
wild gosling," laughed Albert. "Let us hope she will take our advice."

Mae shook her head involuntarily. There was a smile on Norman Mann's
lips.

"Here's health and happiness to the poor child at any rate," he said.

"He pities me," thought Mae, "and I hate him." But then she didn't at
all.

Mae wandered off to the kitchen, as usual, that day, for another of
Lisetta's stories. The Italian, with her glibness of tongue and ready
fund of anecdote, was transformed in her imaginative mind into a
veritable improvisatore. Talila was not by any means the only heroine
of the little tales. Mae had made the acquaintance of many youths and
maidens, and to-day Lisetta, after thinking over her list of important
personages, chose the Madre Ilkana as the heroine of the occasion. Mae
had already heard one or two amusing incidents connected with this old
mother. "I am sure she has a cousin in America," she asserted to-day,
before Lisetta began, "for I know her well. She knits all the time,
and is as bony as a ledge of rocks, and her eyes are as sharp as her
knitting-needles, and her words are the sharpest of all. Her name is
Miss Mary Ann Rogers. Is she like the Madre Ilkana?"

Lisetta shook her head. "No, no, Signorina, La Madre is as plump and
round as a loaf of bread, and as soft as the butter on it. She has
five double chins that she shakes all the while, but then she has stiff
bristles, like a man's, growing on them, and her knitting-needles and
her words are all sharp as la Signora Maria Anne R-o-o-g-eers, I doubt
not. But her eyes! Why, Signorina, she has the evil eye!" This Lisetta
said in a whisper, while Giovanni shrugged his shoulders bravely, and
little Roberto cuddled closer to Mae.

"Yes," continued Lisetta, "and so no one knows exactly about her eyes,
not daring to look directly into them, but as nearly as I can make out
they are black, and have a soft veil over them, so that you would think
at first they were just about to cry, when suddenly, fires creep up and
burn out the drops, and leave her hot and angry and scorching.

"She must be terrible," cried Mae, with a sudden shrinking.

"She IS terrible," replied Lisetta, "but then she is very clever. You
will see if she is not clever when you hear the story I shall now tell
you," and Lisetta laughed, and showed her own one double chin, with its
two little round dimples. Then she smoothed down her peasant apron, bade
Giovanni leave off pinching Roberto, and commenced.

"The government hates the banditti," began Lisetta, wisely, "and indeed
it should," and she looked gravely at Giovanni, "for they are very wild
men, who live reckless bad lives, and steal, and are quite dreadful. But
we poor, we do not hate them as the government does, because they are
good to us, and do not war with us, and sometimes those we love join
them--a brother or a cousin, perhaps,"--and Lisetta's black eyes filled,
and her lip quivered. "As for the Madre, she loved them all, and said
they were all relations.

"At this time of which I speak, the soldiers were chasing and hunting
the banditti very hard, and they had been compelled to hide for their
lives up among the mountains. There they would have died, had it not
been for the peasants, who supplied them with food. Small parties of the
bandits would come out for it. There were two very powerful men of the
banditti, who were skirmishing about in this way, not far from the
Madre Ilkana's, when they saw two soldiers, in advance of their company,
approaching them. The banditti were not afraid for themselves, but they
wanted to get back to their friends with the bread and meat, so instead
of fighting, they fled to the Madre. She took them in, and bade them be
sure they were safe with her. But the soldiers had caught sight of them,
and they stopped at every house and enquired and searched for them; and
so, soon they came to the Madre Ilkana's. They charged her in the name
of the government to give up the banditti in her house. The Madre kept
on with her knitting, and told them there were only her two sons in the
house, and mothers never gave up their sons to any one.

"'Ha!' laughed one of the soldiers,' mothers must give up their children
to King Death, and it is He who wants your bad boys.' Upon which, the
Madre arose and cursed them. Curses are common with us, Signorina, but
not La Madre's curses. She talked of their mothers to them, and of their
sons, and of the Holy Virgin and child, and she cursed them in the name
of all these, if they dared steal her children from her. They should
take them over her old dead body, she swore, though her knitting-needles
and her eyes were her only weapons, and then she turned her eyes full
upon them, with the evil spirit leering and laughing out of them, and
the soldiers, one of whom was an officer, fell on their knees and shook
like leaves, and prayed her to forgive them; saying that they were sure
her boys were good sons, and no banditti. And while they knelt crouching
there, La Madre knocked on the floor and in rushed the banditti, armed
with great knives. They caught and bound the two soldiers, and took away
their weapons, and jumped on their horses, and fled.

"La Madre took her knitting again, and sat down quietly by the side
of the bound men, until a half hour later some twelve more soldiers
cantered up. As they rode by, all the people came to their doorways, and
the soldiers stopped and asked if they had seen two horsemen. Then La
Madre gathered up her knitting and went quietly out into the crowd. She
made a low bow to the man with the biggest feather in his cap, and she
told him her story. 'I have two sons,' she said, 'whom I love so well.'
Then she told how the soldiers mistook her sons for banditti, and tried
to take them from her in her own house. 'Though I am old, I have a good
life among my friends and neighbors here, and I fought a while in my
own mind before I said to my sons: Go, my boys, your mother will die for
you. But I did it. I bade them bind the soldiers and steal away. Then I
sat guarding the men till you came. You will find them safe in my little
house there. Now, take me to prison--kill me, but look in my eyes first,
and then, whoever lays a hand on me, take La Madre Ilkana's curse.'

"And the people all swore that there were two snakes coiled up in La
Madre's eyes then, and they hissed, and struck out with their fiery
tongues, and the crowd fell on their knees, and the neighbors all set up
a great shout of 'La Madre Ilkana,' so that they quite drowned the voice
of the man with the big feather."

"Is that all?" asked Mae, as Lisetta paused. "What did the soldiers do?"

"O, they hired a passing carriage to take the men whose horses were
stolen back to Castellamare, and they all cantered off, without saying
a word to La Madre, and when they had turned a corner of the road, she
began to laugh. O, how she laughed! All the people laughed with her, and
the children crowed and the dogs barked, for the rest of that whole day.

"And a neighbor who passed La Madre's at midnight, said she was laughing
out loud then."



CHAPTER IX.


"Signorina." Mae was passing down the long hall when she heard the
whisper. She turned and saw Lisetta, with shining eyes and pink cheeks,
standing at her side. Her pretty plump shoulders were only half covered,
and the array of colors about her transformed her into a sort of
personified rainbow. This was Lisetta's Carnival attire, and very proud
she was of it.

"Why, Lisetta, what do you want, and what makes you so happy?" called
Mae.

"O, Signorina, the cousins are here,--and others,--all in mask. They
fill Maria's rooms quite full. It is very gay out there, and they all
want to see you, Signorina. I have told them how well you speak Italian
and how you love Italy, and to-night, they say, you shall be one of us.
So come." All this while Lisetta had been leading Mae swiftly down the
corridor, until as she said these last words, she reached and pushed
open the door. A great shout of laughter greeted Mae's ear, and a pretty
picture met her eyes--gaily decked youths and maidens clapping their
hands and chattering brightly, while the padrona was just entering the
opposite doorway, bearing two flasks of native wine, and some glasses.

"'Tis genuine Orvieto," she called out, and this raised another shout.
Then she caught sight of Mae and bowed low towards her. "Here is the
little foreign lady," she cried, and a dozen pairs of big black eyes
were turned eagerly and warmly on Mae. She bowed and smiled at them,
and said in pleading tones, "O, pray do not call me the 'little foreign
lady' now. Play I am as good an Italian as my heart could wish I were."

This speech was received with new applause, and the padrona handed
around the glasses saying: "We must drink first to the health of our new
Italian. May she never leave us."

"Yes, yes," called Lisetta, lifting high her glass. "Yes, yes," cried
all, and Mae drank as heartily as any of them. Then she shook her head
and gazed very scornfully down on her dark, stylish clothes. "I am not
thoroughly Italian yet," she cried. "Here, and here, and here," cried
one and another, proffering bits of their own gay costumes, and in a
moment Mae had received all sorts of tributes--a string of red beads
from one, a long sash from another, a big-balled stiletto from a third,
so that she was able from the gleanings to trim herself up into at least
a grotesque and un-American Carnival figure. Then the Italians with
their soft tongues began to flatter her.

"How lovely the Signorina would look in a contadina costume--the home
costume," said Lisetta gravely. "It is so beautiful, is it not?" And
then those two or three privileged ones, who had seen Lisetta's
home, went into ecstasies over its many charms. Lisetta, next to the
Signorina, was the heroine of the occasion. She was from a distance, was
handsome and clever, and the padrona gave glowing accounts of her full
purse, and two pretty donkeys, and house by the sea.

They had a very gay time. Such singing, and then dancing and frolicking,
and such a feline softness in all their gaiety. None of the German or
Saxon bullying, and barking and showing of teeth; in no wise a game of
dogs, which always ends in a fight; but a truly kittenish play, with
sharp claws safely tucked out of sight behind the very softest paws,
and a rich, gentle curve of motion, inexpressibly witching to our little
northern maiden, who was fast losing her head amid it all. Mae did not
reflect that felines are treacherous. She only drew a quick, mental
picture of the parlor on the other side of the hall, which she compared
to this gay scene. Mrs. Jerrold filling in dull row after row of her
elaborate sofa cushion, which was bought in all its gorgeousness of
floss fawn's head and bead eyes, Edith and Albert hard at work over
their note books, or reading up for the sights of to-morrow, Mr. Mann
with his open book also, all quiet and studious. Eric, alone, might be
softly whistling, or writing an invitation to Miss Hopkins to climb up
St. Peter's dome with him, or to visit the tomb of Cecilia Metella, or
the Corso, as the case might be, while here--

As Mae reached this point in her musings, the Italians were forming for
a dance, so she sprang up to join them. Two or three peasants from the
country south had wandered up with the world to Rome, for Carnival time,
then for Lent. They had brought with them their pipes and zitterns.
In the mornings they made short pilgrimages, playing in front of the
shrines about the city, or roaming out on the campagna to some quiet
church. In the evening time they wandered up the stone stairways of the
great houses, and paused on the landings before the different homes. If
all was still they passed on, but if there was noise, laughter, sound of
voices, they laid aside their penitential manner, and struck into dance
music, flashing their velvety eyes, and striking pretty attitudes,
aided greatly by their Alpine hats and sheep-skins and scarlet-banded
stockings.

Three of these peasants had appeared at the padrona's doorway, by a sort
of magic. They bowed and smiled, and commenced to play. Every one sprang
up. "Dance," cried they all, and flew for their partners. Mae found
herself in the midst of the crowd, and having the most willing and
nimble of feet, she soon toned and coaxed the fashionable waltz on
which she had started into accord with the more elastic footsteps of her
companion. There was something in the serpentine, winding and unwinding
motion, the coaxingness of the steps, that was deliciously intoxicating
to Mae. The color came to her cheeks, the smile played around her lips,
and when she paused to breathe, she found the Italians showing their
white teeth, and clapping their brown hands in her honor, while the
tallest musician gazed at her from the dark doorway, with the rapt
reverence he gave to all things beautiful and thrilling. She was a new
song to him.

"The Signorina is the veriest Italian of us all," cried Lisetta.

"She honors our Italy," called Mae's last partner.

"Her feet are those of a chamois," said one from the north.

"Nay, she flies," replied another.

They all spoke in their earnest manner, and the praises, that fall in
fulsome flattery in English, were delicate and stimulating as they
slid in soft Italian from their full, red lips. Mae tossed her head
carelessly, but she sipped the praises and found them sweet.

"Now for the Tarantella," said the padrona, so Lisetta shook her
tambourine wildly, and the very prettiest girl of them all, and a big,
brown boy (happy fellow!) began that coquettish bit of witchery. The
pretty girl tripped around and around and wreathed her arms over her
head, and the boy knelt appealingly and sprang up passionately again
and again, until the clock struck ten, and the party broke up. Mae
shook hands with a new friend. He was a stone-cutter, and was soon to be
married, and he poured out all his plans and hopes into her sympathetic
ears, and told of his pretty bride to be, and of her dowry. Mae, in
turn, sent her love to the happy bride, and took a charm from her
watch-chain to go with it, a tiny silver boat, and she sent it with a
hope that some day they might both sail over to America. At which the
bridegroom shook his head very decidedly, and kissed Mae's hand and
bowed himself out. Then, after she had disrobed her of her borrowed
plumes, all the others kissed her hand and bowed themselves out, and
Roberto and Giovanni awaked, and got up from the corner, and stood on
their heads and hallooed as loud as ever they pleased, and the evening
was over, and Lisetta and the padrona and the boys and Mae were alone.

"Oh, oh, oh," cried Mae, "how perfectly perfect. Do you always have such
good times as this?"

"At home, yes," replied Lisetta, folding her hands and smiling. "We have
many a play-day on the bay of Naples." Then she roused herself: "Good
night, Signorina," she said, "keep your ears open."

Mae had barely reached her room when she appreciated Lisetta's last
words. She heard music in the street below. She raised her window; Eric
and Norman lifted the parlor window at the same moment, "Come in here,"
they cried. So in she ran, took a place between them, and they silently
listened to the maskers' serenade. The musicians sang at first the
gayest of tunes, but suddenly, by some subtile impulse, they changed to
quieter minor airs, and sang songs full of tears and passion and love
and tenderness. Then they silently turned to go. Norman Mann touched Mae
on the shoulder. He handed her a bunch of Carnival flowers. They were
Bero's, but she flung them unhesitatingly into the street, leaning far
out to watch the singers catch them and separate them in the moonlight.
They called out loud their thanks--their "Grazie, grazie," as sweet as
any lily just broken from its stem--and as they turned to go Mae saw
that each one was decked with a sprig from the bouquet, pulled through
his button-hole or the riband of his hat.

Only the tallest musician, who walked somewhat apart, carried his flower
tightly clasped in his hand, and now and again he raised it to his lips.
He probably dreamed over it that night, and played his dream out in
a gentle, wistful, minor adoration before the Madonna at the Quattro
Fontane the next morning.

O, the dreams and poems and songs without words that drop into our lives
from the sudden flash of stranger eyes, or the accidental touch of an
unknown hand, or the tender warmth of a swift smile! And if our eyes,
our touch, our smiles may only have floated off in like manner--as
dreams and poems and melody--to give added rhythm and harmony to other
lives.

Mae drew a long sigh, one of those delightful, contented sighs, with a
smile wrapped up in it. "I am glad you are so happy," said Norman Mann,
smiling down at her. When Norman spoke like that Mae felt only, O, so
very content. She quite forgot all grudges against him; she would have
liked just at that moment to have the world stand quite still. This was
very different from the ordinary Mae. Usually she longed that it might
go faster, and would put her pink and white ear quite close to the brown
earth to hear if it were turning as swiftly as ever it could. "I like
it to hurry, hurry, hurry," said eager, restless Mae. "I love to live
quickly and see what's coming next."

But Mae was not in that mood to-night. She leaned out of the window all
untroubled. If the sun could stand still off behind the world--as he is
now--and the moon could stand still right before us--as she is now--and
we could stay right here, we three. Why, no, Eric has gone in and is
walking up and down nervously. Thus Mae thought, and was quiet. "What
are you thinking about?" asked Norman. She told him naturally, with her
eyes on his until she reached the words "and we." Then her eyes fell,
and she paused.

"Yes," replied Norman, "I have the same feeling," and there was a great
deal more on the very tippest tip of his tongue. But Mae turned her face
from him slightly; the moon stole softly behind the flimsiest little
cloud that any one could have seen through, and he paused, silly fellow.
These slight withdrawals, that should have urged him on, deceived him.
He stopped, and then he remembered Mae's past doings, her recklessness,
her waywardness. It was not time yet to speak what he had in his heart
to say, and what quivered on his tongue. So he only asked abruptly: "You
will go with me to-morrow night for one of your gayest frolics, will you
not? We will go down on the Corso for all the Mocoletti fun. I am very
anxious to be in another of your good times."

"O, would you like it?" said Mae; "I am so glad. I should delight in it.
It will be almost too good." She stopped abruptly again, and gave him a
quick, soft glance, just as the moon rode triumphantly out from behind
the filmy, flimsy veil, and shone full down on her eyes and hair. It
fell on a bright, round, glistening ball, tucked in among some half
curls behind her ear. "What is that?" asked Norman.

"That"--Mae put up her hand and drew it out--"that is my stiletto. I
forgot to give it back to Lisetta. It is pretty, isn't it?"

Norman took the long needle from her hand and looked at it. "It is not
as pretty as the flowered stiletto. Why didn't you get one of those?"

"Why, do you not know that those are not worn by free maidens? They are
one of the added glories of a matron. I like my round, smooth ball
a great deal better. It means liberty." And she plunged the steel
tremulously back into her hair.

"We had better go in now; this night air is bad for you." The moon
blazed scornfully down on Norman Mann as he said this. She had had a
wide experience, and had rarely seen such a stupid, cowardly fellow, so
she thought. Yet, after all, Norman only acted in self-defense. Here was
a girl by his side who gloried, as it seemed to him, in her freedom, and
that being so, he must get away as soon as possible from that window,
that moon, and that little girl.

"Well, Norman," cried Eric, advancing eagerly as they turned from the
window, "when do you really suppose it will come off?"

"Suppose what will come off?" inquired Mae.

"O, I forgot you were here. Well, don't tell any one else. Norman is to
fight a duel."

"To fight a duel--and be killed?" gasped Mae.

"You have but a poor opinion of my powers," laughed Norman, "although
the German looked a veteran duellist from his scars. His face was fairly
embroidered or fancy-worked with red lines. A sort of hem in his nose,
and tucks and seams all over his cheeks. Notice my knowledge in this
line, Miss Mae. You ought to be ashamed, Eric, to have spoken of it."

"Isn't it all a joke?" asked Mae, pushing her head out of the window
again, to hide the sudden white terror in her face. "I didn't suppose
Americans fought duels when they were off pleasuring." This sentence Mae
meant to pass as a gay, light, easy speech, to prove that Norman Mann
and a duel were not such a very dreadful combination to her feminine
mind.

"NO, it is no joke, but dead earnest," replied Eric. "I am to be his
second, and you must keep it a great secret, Mae, till it is all over."

"All over!"--a sudden vision of Norman lying white and motionless with
a deep wound across his soft, brown temple. Mae closed her eyes. "I
suppose I might as well tell you about it," said Norman, "now that this
stupid Eric has let out about the affair, although it may never come to
anything. I was dining to-night at a little restaurant on the Felice, a
quiet, homelike place, which a good many artists, and especially women,
frequent. There is a queer, crazy little American, who thinks herself
a painter, and is a harmless lunatic, who is a regular guest at this
restaurant. Everybody smiles at her absurdities, but is ready enough to
be kind to the poor old creature. To-night, however, I was hardly seated
when in came a party of Germans, all in mask and Carnival costume. One
of them was arrayed in exact imitation of this old lady. He had on a
peaked bonnet and long, black gloves, with dangling fingers, such as she
invariably wears. These he waved around mockingly and seating himself
opposite her, he followed her every motion. The ladies at the same table
rose and went away. Then up gets this big ruffian and sits down on the
edge of the old lady's chair. I could stand it no longer, but jumping in
front of him, showered down all the heavy talk I knew in German,
Italian and French, subsiding at last into my mother tongue, with her
appropriate epithets. Having sense enough left to know that he could not
reap the full benefit of English, I pulled out my card, wrote my
address on it, and threw it on the table, and I rather think that was
understood. There's no country that I have heard of where men don't know
what 'we'll fight this out, means.'" Norman was striding up and down the
room now almost as restlessly as Eric had done, but he seated himself
again as Mae asked for the rest.

"The rest is very simple, Miss Mae--mere business. I turned to go away,
and one of his friends approached me to ask for the name of my second.
I gave Eric's here. He bowed and said: 'He shall hear from me this
evening, and I came home. The evening has advanced to midnight, but not
a word yet. No, it is not quite eleven, I see."

"You'll have the choice of weapons if they challenge you," said Eric;
"you'll take pistols, I suppose? Just think of my living to really
assist in a 'pistols-and-coffee-for-two' affair!"

"I daresay it will be coffee for two, served separately, and with no
thought of pistols. I don't really believe it will come to anything.
There are ways of getting out of it," said Norman, lighting a cigarette.

"Will you refuse to fight?" asked Mae, and her heart, which had been
white with fear for Norman the second before, flashed now with quick,
red scorn. Even the Huguenot maiden would, after all, have despised her
lover if he had quietly allowed her to tie the white handkerchief to
his arm. Believe it, she loved him far, far better as she clung to him,
pressed closely to his warm, living heart, because she realized in an
agony that his honor was strong enough to burst even the tender bonds of
her dear love, and that he would break from her round arms to rush into
that ghostly, ghastly death-embrace on the morrow, at the dreadful knell
of St. Bartholomew bells.

Suppose he had yielded. Suppose we saw him in the picture standing
quietly, unresistingly, as her soft fingers bound the white badge, that
meant protection and life, to his arm. Would not she, as well as he,
have known that it was a badge of cowardice, and that he wore a heart as
white?

And afterwards, would she have loved the living man, breathing in
air heavy with the hearts' life of his brothers and friends, as she
worshiped the dead man, whose cold body rested forever down deep in
mother earth's brown, soft bosom, but whose very life of life swelled
the great throng of heroes and martyrs who have closed their own eyes
upon life's pictures, that those pictures might shine clearer and
brighter to other eyes?

If the man had yielded, and the picture showed him thus, would we see
the Huguenot lovers adorning half the houses of the land? Most often
they are found in that particular corner of the home belonging to some
maiden--that sacred room of her own, where she prays her prayers, and
lives her most secret life. I have often wondered at the many girls who
hang that especial picture over their fire-places. It must be a case of
unconscious ideality. They realize that love must be so subject to honor
that heart-strings would break for the sake of that honor, if need be,
even though the harmonious love-song of two hearts is hushed; and what
is the love-song of any two beings compared to a life-song of honor
for the world--those wonderful life-songs that we all know? One of them
sings itself so loudly to me now, over ages of romance and history, that
I must let my simple story wait and give way to it for a minute.

There was a man who lived once. If God did not create him, Homer did.
The Oracle told him that the first man who put foot on the Trojan shores
would die. He knew this before he started on his voyage for Greece. He
left a wife and home behind him, whom he dearly loved. I wonder if he
used to pace the deck of the rich barge, and listen to the men
chatting around him, and smile as they planned of returning, proud and
victorious, to their homes and their wives.

All the while under his smile he knew he was to die, not in the glory
of fight, although his sword swung sharp and bright at his side, in any
thrilling fashion, to be sung of and wept of by his fellows.

All the while the heavy barge sailed on, and at last land came in sight.
I wonder if his heart was full when he saw it? Did he remember his wife
and his home? Did he feel his life strong within him, and eager as a
battle-horse, as he neared the land where wars were to be fought, and
glories won?

All the while his heart was firm. He stood the very foremost of them
all, as they drifted quite in to the green, green shore. Around him
men talked and laughed, and the sun shone. He may have laid his hand
commandingly on some youthful shoulders and pushed back the eager boy
who longed to bound first into this new world. He may have saved him
thus from death for life. We do not know.

All we do know is, that with his own brave feet he marched ahead of them
all, solemnly, smilingly, with the oracle in his heart. From the vessel
to the green, green shore--such a little step. He leaps from the Grecian
barge to the Trojan land, alive. Does he turn to look at his comrades
and off eastwards, beyond homewards, with a great thrill before he falls
dead? We do not know.

All we do know is, that WE thrill now as we see him leaping to his
death, even over this gap of ages, through these shadows of unreality.

We have left Mae flashing scorn at Norman for a long while, a much
longer while than she really needed for her flash, for Norman's angry
start, violent exclamation, and indignant glance convinced her of her
mistake before he answered her.

"I refuse to fight--I--Great--I beg your pardon, Miss Mae, but of course
I'll fight. I only hope the fellow isn't such a craven as to let it blow
over. However, I strongly suspect policy and his friends will keep him
from it. For my part, I would like to break my lance for the poor woman.
Any good blow struck for the fair thing, helps old Mother earth a bit, I
suppose."

"That's your idea of life?" queried Eric, rather gravely. "My efforts
are all to push Eric Madden on his way a bit."

"And I haven't any idea; I just live," said Mae, "like a black and
tan dog. I wish I were one. Then the only disagreeable part of me, my
conscience, would be out of the way. But what has all this to do with
the duel?" "That has something to do with it, I fancy," said Eric,
rising and leaving the room hastily, as the bell rang. "No, stay where
you are. I'll receive him in the little salon." Mae rose and walked to
the fireside, and looked down on the two small logs of wet wood that
sizzled on the fire-dogs. The faint, red flame that flickered around
them, looked sullen and revengeful, she thought, as she watched the
feeble blaze intently. It seemed hours since Eric had left the room.
What was Norman thinking? What was the stranger saying out in the little
salon? No, no, she would not think thus. She would repeat something to
quiet herself--poetry--what should it be? Ah, here is Eric.

It was Eric. His face was flushed. His lip curled. "Coward! craven!" he
exclaimed, "Coward, craven."

"Well, tell us about it," said Norman, coolly, but a wave of color
rushed over his face.

"O, palaver and stuff. Somebody's dreadfully ill--dying, I believe, and
that somebody is wife, or mother, or son to this brute you challenged.
He's got to go, the coward. If you are ever in his vicinity again, and
send him your card, he will understand it and meet you at such place and
with such weapons as you prefer. Bah--too thin!" and Eric concluded with
this emphatic statement.

Mae leaned her head against her two clasped hands which rested on the
mantel-piece. How strangely everything looked; even the dim fire had a
sort of aureole about it, as her eyes rested there again; but when one
looks through tears, all things are haloed mistily. Norman turned and
looked at Mae, as Eric walked impatiently about. She did not move or
speak. He walked to her side, and stood looking down at her. The faint
mist in her left eye was forming into a bright, clear globe as large as
any April raindrop. Mae knew this, and knew it would fall, unless she
put up her hand and brushed it away, and that would be worse. The color
rose to her cheeks as she waited the dreadful moment. She was perfectly
still, her hands clasped before her, her head bent, as the crystal drop
gathered all the mist and halo in its full, round embrace, and
pattered down upon the third finger of her left hand--her wedding-ring
finger--and lay there, clear and sparkling as a diamond!

Norman Mann stooped and laid his hand over it. "You are glad, then!" "I
should be sorry to have you die," said Mae, but her dimples and blushes
and drooping eye-lids said, oh, a great deal more. "Good night," she
fluttered, and ran off.



CHAPTER X.


Mae dreamed happy dreams that night, and awoke with a smile on her lips.
She dressed with the greatest care, put a touch of the color Norman
liked at her throat, and fastened a charm he had given her to her
bracelet. Still, she loitered on her way to the breakfast-room, and when
she seated herself at the table, a sudden embarrassment made her keep
her eyes on her plate, or talk to Eric, or Edith, or any one but Norman.
Yet she was perfectly conscious of his every word and motion. She knew
he only took two cups of coffee instead of three, and that he helped her
to mandarins--a fruit of which she was very fond--five times, so that
she had a plate heaping with golden untouched balls before her. After
breakfast, she felt a great desire to run away, so she asked Eric to
take her to the Capitol, and leave her there for a time. "I want to
see something solid this morning, that has lasted a long while, and the
marbles will do me good."

Yes, Eric would take her at once. Would she go and get her hat? She
went for it, and scolded herself all the time for running away when she
wanted to stay home. Yet, after all, who dares put out one's hand to
grasp the moon when at last it approaches? No woman, at any rate.

There was a malicious sort of teasing pleasure in running away from
Norman, mingled with a shrinking modesty; and, besides, he knew the
way to the Capitol, if he chose to follow, and knew she was to be there
alone. So, on the whole, Mae went off with a blissful heart.

As she sat down in that celebrated room, immortalized by the Gladiator,
the Faun and the Antinous, scales seemed to fall from her eyes and a
weight from her heart. Life meant something more than the mere play she
delighted in, or the labor she despised. She took it in in this way. She
realized, first of all, the enduringness of the marbles. They had stood,
they will stand, for thousands of years. What have stood? What will
stand? Idle blocks of stone, without form or meaning, or simply three
beautiful shapes? No; three souls, thinks Mae, three real people,
and she looks at the abiding faun, freedom and joy of the Satyr, the
continual sentimental sadness of the Antinous, and the perpetual brave
death-struggle of the Gladiator. They are living on now, and touching
our hearts. Their mute lips open other eloquent mouths to speak for
them. Hawthorne and Byron tell us what the Faun's soul, what the
Gladiator's soul, look from the white marbles to us, and the world daily
repeats the story the Antinous whispers in his bent, beautiful head, the
vanitas vanitatum that our own hearts whisper, when we drop earnest life
for voluptuous pleasures.

The Faun may smile, although life is only one long play-day in green
fields and woods, because he is a Faun. The man must sigh, when he has
drained his wine-cups and laughed his heartiest laugh, and wakes to
another morning, because he is a man. The cry of humanity echoes in our
souls. We cannot stifle it; we may hush it, and follow our idle joys,
but the day comes when we bend our head with Antinous and Solomon and
the rest of them, and sigh out our vanitas, vanitas also, in the great
weary chorus.

No need, alas! for a Hawthorne, or Byron, or even a Shakspeare to
interpret what the Antinous says for us. Our own hearts do it.

Mae caught the spirit of all this, as her eyes roamed out of the window
on the Sabine hills, where woods and springs sang. She saw the aqueducts
bounding, even in their ruin, arch after arch, to the treasure house of
the waters. "They never can reach it, now," thinks she, "never. Suppose
they cannot, is not the spirit the same?" And now Mae is ready for the
sudden light that dawns on her soul. She springs to her feet. She is
alone in the room with the marble men; and they are quiet; even the
Gladiator bites back his last groan once more.

"The Eternal City," shouts Mae; "I know what it means at last. Oh! Rome,
Rome, I love you!" and she rests her hand on the windowsill, and looks
out on Rome. "Why, it is like a resurrection morn. Ruins? Yes, it is all
ruins, dry bones, and great dead in dust; but there is something more. I
only saw that graveyard part of it before; now, the spirit of the great
men, and great deeds, and words, and thoughts, and prayers," cries Mae,
exultantly. "Why, they are here; not dead, like the rest, but alive, all
around us. Oh! Rome, Rome, forgive me!"

Now, this might have seemed absurd to the custode, or some other people,
if they had put their head in at the door just then. But they didn't;
and, really, it was not absurd. I cannot believe that this small Mae
Madden is the only being who has had a swift, brilliant awakening from
the first surface, depressing thoughts of Rome--an awakening to the
living spirits which float proudly over their vacant shells that lie
below the old pavements. Once you do feel the strong, rich Roman life
about you, the decay, the ruin float off on the dust of the ages, before
the glorified breath of proud matrons and stately warriors, who step
over the centuries to walk by your side. And the centuries have
improved them,--have left their grandeur, and nobility, and bravery,
and civilized them a bit. They form into pageants for you, and fill the
baths and the palaces, but never crowd the Coliseum for the dreadful
contests, unless, maybe, for an occasional bull-fight--some great,
horrid, big bull which would be killed at market to-morrow at any
rate--and even that is as you please. It is wonderful, truly, once we
discern the spirits around us, to notice what a miraculous place Rome
is; how the intervening years of purgatorial flames have turned old Nero
himself into a fairly benevolent, soft old gentleman, even though his
estates have crumbled to such an extent that he may put his golden
palace into the head of his cane, which he always carries now, since his
chariots have gone away. Where are they? Caligula has even made it up
with his mother-in-law, and you reflect with joy on that fact, as the
two flit by your mind's eye, hand in hand. All this nonsense is for
those of us who HAVE awakenings. The rest of "our party" may sit at
Spillman's and eat coffee-cakes and sip Lachrymae Christi, while we walk
alone through the Coliseum, with the crowd of old heathen. They stop,
every one, at the iron cross in the middle, reared over their carnage
and mad mirth, and press their lips to it now. The centuries have done
that. We only, alas! stand gazing mournfully, doubtingly. "Will you
have another coffee-cake?" says some one, and we remember that we are at
Spillman's also. And, indeed, we might be more sensible to stay with our
party always; eat cakes, drink wine, laugh at the old world, vaunt the
new, read Baedeker and the Bible, say our orthodox Protestant prayers,
with a special "Lead us not into Romanism" codicil, and go to bed,
and dream of our own golden houses, Paris dresses, and fat letters of
credit.

At any rate, Mae Madden was electrified by a great sudden sweep of love,
a surging rush of reverence for Rome, and makes no doubt in her own
mind, to this day, that the Faun laughed with her in her joy. In this
exalted frame of mind, she wandered down through the long halls. She was
passing from the room of the Caesars when she heard Norman's voice. So
he had come for her with Eric. She had half fancied he would. She paused
to listen. It was a ringing elastic voice, in no wise lagging in speech,
with a certain measurement in its tones, as if he weighed his words and
thoughts, and gave them out generously, pound for pound, a fair measure
which our grandmother's recipes approved. Mae smiled to herself. "He has
loved Rome always. He caught the spirit of it long ago. He will be glad
to know I have found it also. I wish"--and Mae sighed a scrap of a
sigh, and looked down at the toe of her boot, with which she drew little
semi-circles before her.

Mae was truly in a very tender mood to-day. I think if Norman had caught
sight of her face at that moment, he would have sent Eric off, and right
there and then, before all the Caesars--why what is the matter? The face
contracts as if in pain. What was the cause? She had heard Norman say,
"I'm afraid I was wrong, but I never meant anything by my attentions to
the girl, Eric. It was really on your account. I never liked Miss Rae
particularly. I was thrown much with her because you and I have been
together constantly, but she does not grow on me. I never expected
you should consider me as her necessary cavalier always. As for this
evening, I am engaged to Miss Mae, so that settles this matter, but I
wish that hereafter you would not get me into such scrapes."

Poor Mae! she leaned against Nero--or was it Caracalla?--surely somebody
very hard and cold and cruel,--and stopped breathing for a moment.
For she had heard wrong, had misunderstood Miss Rae for Miss Mae, and
supposed it was of herself that he spoke. Her heart stood still for the
minutest part of a minute. Then she turned softly and quickly, went back
to the Gladiator's room, left word with the custode for Eric that she
wasn't well, and had gone home alone, walked off down the Capitol steps,
took a cab and drove away.

At home she had a long, earnest talk with Lisetta, after which Lisetta
had a short, brisk talk with the padrona. "It means money," she said,
"and I can play I did it for the Signorina's safety." Later, Mae wrote
a brief, polite note to Norman Mann. She was ill, had gone to bed, and
wouldn't be able to go to the Corso with him to-night. She tried to
stifle the hot anger and other emotions out of the words, and read and
re-read them to assure herself that they were perfectly easy, natural,
and polite. At last she tore them up and sent this instead:


MY DEAR MR. MANN:--Such a pity that we are not to have our fun, after
all. Yet, perhaps it is just as well. I should be very speedily without
my light, and the cry of "senza moccolo, senza moccola," must be very
dispiriting. Have a good time right along. Good-bye--good-bye.


Of course, if Mae had not been beside herself with conflicting emotions,
she would never have sent this note, or repeated the good-bye in that
echoing, departing sort of way. Norman Mann knit his brow as he read it.
"What is the row now?" he thought. "What a child it is, anyway. She has
had the mocoletti fun in her mind since we left America, and now she
throws it away. Well, there's no help for it; I'm booked for Miss Rae.
I'll get Eric to see if Mae's really ill. I wonder if she's afraid of
me, because she cried last night, afraid I took that big tear for more
than it was worth.

"Mae," said Eric, entering her room an hour later, "Norman feels
dreadfully that you are not able to go to-night, and so do I. I suppose
those wretched marbles did it this morning. Couldn't you possibly come?"

"No," replied Mae, rising on her elbow, "but sit down a moment, Eric."

"How pretty you look," said her brother, seating himself by her side.
Mae's hair was tumbled in brown waves that looked as if they couldn't
quite make up their minds to curl, much as they wanted to; her eyes
shone strangely; and the little scarlet shawl that she had drawn over
her head and shoulders was no brighter than her flushed cheeks. She
smiled at her brother, but said hurriedly; "Tell me of your plans for
to-night. I suppose you and Mr. Mann are going with your new friends."

"Yes, Norman will go with me and the girls, but he does it with a bad
enough grace. He's dreadfully tired of Miss Rae; and, to tell you the
truth, Mae, she is rather namby-pamby--very different from Miss Hopkins,
and then, besides, he had so set his heart on going with you to-night."

"O, yes," said Mae, scornfully, and bit her lips.

"Why, Mae, what is the matter with you? You seem to doubt every one
and everything. You know Norman is truth itself." "Is he?" asked Mae,
indifferently.

"I've seen for a long time," continued Eric, "that you two were not the
friends you once were, but I don't understand this open dislike. Doesn't
it spoil your pleasure? You don't seem to have the real old-fashioned
good times, my little girl," and Eric pulled his clumsy dear hand
through a twist of the brown hair caressingly.

"O, Eric," cried Mae, "that is like old times again," and a tear
splattered down into the big hand. "What, crying, Mae?" "No, dear--that
is, yes. I believe I am a little bit homesick. I wish I could go
back behind my teens again. Do you remember the summer that I was
twelve--that summer up by the lake? I wish you and I could paddle around
in one of the old flat-bottomed tubs once more, don't you, Eric? We'd go
for lilies and fish for minnows--that is, we'd fish for perch and catch
the minnows--and talk about when you should go to college and pull in
the race, and I should wear a long dress and learn all the college tunes
to sing with you and your Yale friends. Do you remember, Eric? And
now, O dear me, you lost your race, and I hate my long gowns.
O--my--dear--brother--do you like it all as well as you thought you
would?"

"Why, Mae, you poor little tot, you're sentimental--for you. Yes, I like
the future as well as I always did. I never gave much for the present,
at any rate."

"But I did, Eric; I always did, till just now, and now I hate it, and
I'm afraid of the future, and I'd like to grow backwards, and instead,
in a month, I'll have another birth-day, and go into those dreadful
twenties." Then Mae was quiet a moment. "Eric, I was sentimental," she
said, after a pause. "Really, I do like the future very much. I quite
forgot how much for the moment."

"You're a strange child, indeed," replied Eric, the puzzled. "Your words
are like lightning. I had just got melted down and ready to reply to
your reminiscences by lots of others, and here you are all jolly and
matter-of-fact again. I was growing so dreadfully unselfish that I
should have insisted on staying home with you this evening to cheer you
up a bit."

"And give up the mocoletti! Why, Eric! I shouldn't have known how to
take such an offer. No, no, trot off and array yourself, and you may
come back and say good-bye."

"I must say good-bye now, dear, for I dine at the Costanzi with the
girls and their aunt."

"Now, just now, Eric?"

"Why yes, Mae. You are getting blue again, aren't you? Getting ready for
Ash Wednesday to-morrow?"

"Oh, no, no, dear. Kiss me, Eric, again. You're a good, dear boy. No; I
didn't cry that drop at all. Good-bye; and to-morrow is Ash Wednesday.
But we don't sorrow or fast in Paradise, I suppose."



CHAPTER XI.


The Corso was all ablaze. The whole world was there. Under a balcony
stood a party of peasants. Of this group, two were somewhat aside. One
of these was tall, dark, a fair type of Southern Italian; the other
small, agile and graceful, dressed in a fresh contadina costume, with
her brown hair braided down her shoulders. She seemed excited, and as
the crowd pressed nearer she would draw back half-fearfully. "Lisetta,"
she whispered, "I am spoiling your good time. Talk to your friends;
never mind me. I will follow by your side, and soon I shall catch the
spirit of it all, too." Saying this, she stepped from under the balcony,
held out her feeble little taper and joined in the cries around her,
pausing to blow at any lowered bit of wax that came in her way. It was
maddening sport; her light was extinguished again and again, but
she would plead to have it relit, and there was sure to be some
tender-hearted, kindly knight at hand to help her.

She ran on quickly, fearlessly, gliding and creeping and sliding through
the crowd, her hair flying, her eyes dancing. Even in the dense throng
many turned to look at her, and one tall man started suddenly from the
shadow of a side street, where he had been standing motionless, and
threw himself before the girl. He put out his arm, grasped her tightly,
and drew her a few feet into the shadow. "Signorina!" he said. "Hush,
hush," she whispered then in colder tones. "Let me go, Signor; you are
mistaken. You, do not know me." He smiled quietly, holding her hands
clasped in his. "I do not know you, Signorina? You do not know me. Your
face is the picture always before my eyes."

"Yes, yes, forgive me," she fluttered, "I was startled, and indeed I
am no Signorina now, but one of your own country peasants. I am with
Lisetta. Why, where is Lisetta?"

Where, indeed, was she? There were hundreds of contadine in the great
crowd surging by, but no Lisetta. The little peasant wrung her hands
quite free from the man's grasp. "I must go home," she said. "I don't
want any more Carnival."

"No, no," said the officer, quietly, reassuringly. "Get cool. Tell me
how Lisetta looks and is dressed, and if we can not find her here, I
will take you up to your friend's balcony."

"O, no, not there. Anywhere else, but not there."

"Why not?" asked Bero.

"Because, because,--yes, I will tell you," said Mae, remembering her
wrongs, and suddenly moved by the sympathy and softness of the great
eyes above her,--"because they think I am home ill, and here I am, you
see," and she laughed a little hurriedly,--"besides, I go away with
Lisetta to-morrow morning,--hush, let no one hear,--to Sorrento. You
must never, never tell. How do I look? Will I make a good peasant, when
once the dear sun has browned my hands and forehead, and I have grown
Italianized?" And she lifted her face, into which the saucy gaiety had
returned, up to him temptingly.

His warm blood was kindled. "You are a little child of the sun-god now,"
he exclaimed, passionately. "May I share some of your days in heaven? I
am ordered to Naples tomorrow night; shall be only twelve hours behind
you. May I come on the day after to see you in your new home?"

"O, how delightful! But, perhaps, my lord, our little cottage by the sea
isn't grand enough for your spurs and buttons and glory. We are simple
folks you know,--peasants all,--but our hearts, Signor, they are
hospitable, and such as we have we will gladly give you. What do you say
to the bay of Naples, and oranges for our luncheon day after tomorrow?"
And Mae laughed lightly and joyously. Her little burnt taper fell to
the ground, and she clasped her hands together. "What a happy thing life
will be!"

"Will you live there and be a peasant forever?" asked Bero, leaning
forward. "There are villas by the sea, too, Signorina."

Mae didn't hear these last words. Her heart had stood still on that
"forever." Live there forever, forever, and never see her mother or
Eric, or,--or any one again! "I hadn't thought of that," she said,
"I hadn't thought of that." She stood still with her hands clasped,
thinking. The officer at her side, looking down at her, was thinking
also. He was fighting a slight mental struggle, a sort of combat he was
quite unused to. Should he let the child go on in this wild freak? He
knew the cottage by the sea; the peasant home would be dreadful to her.
He knew that by that same day after to-morrow, life in lower Italy, with
the dirty, coarse people about her would be a burden. Yet he hesitated.
He fought the battle in this way: Should he not stand a better chance
if he let her go? He had his leave of absence for three weeks (this was
true; "ordered to Naples," he had called it to Mae). Three weeks away
from his world, near this winsome, strange, magnetic little being,
with the bay of Naples, and moonlight, and his own glories and her
loveliness! He couldn't give up this chance. No, no. He would surely see
her in a few hours after her troubles began, and comfort her. So he only
smiled quietly down at her again, as she stood troubled by his side, and
said: "Lisetta will seek you near your balcony if she knows where it is.
Don't be troubled."

"But where is my balcony?" asked Mae.

"Come here," said Bero, leading her slightly forward. She looked up and
saw the quiet side-window, where day after day the officer had flung
her the sweet flowers when no one was looking. "I know this place very
well," he said meaningly. Mae smiled a little cheerfully. "You have
beautiful taste," she replied, "I have never seen such exquisite
bouquets before."

Bero stroked his moustaches complacently. "You honor me, Signorina. I
hope you may receive many, many more beautiful flowers--from the same
hand." He whispered these last words, and Mae turned her head half
uneasily. She looked up at the balcony. How odd it was that there, but
a few feet away, were Mrs. Jerrold, Edith, and Albert. She fancied
she could detect their voices, though she could not see them. The
Hopkins-Rae window was vacated. "The girls" were probably down on the
Corso with Eric and Norman, and Mae drew a little nearer to Bero, and
looked up half appealingly. His eyes were fixed strangely on something
or some one across the street. Mae followed their gaze, and saw upon the
opposite balcony the beautiful veiled lady. She held in her hand a long
rod tipped with a blazing taper.

"O, she is like a vestal virgin with her light, or a queen with a
sceptre," cried Mae exultingly.

"She may be the vestal virgin, but the queen is by my side," said Bero
earnestly.

Mae wished he would not talk in this way, and she tried to laugh it off.
"I have no sceptre or crown; I'm but a poor queen in my common garb."

"We'll have the coronation day after to-morrow," replied Bero, very
earnestly still.

"Tell me about her," and Mae nodded her head toward the strange lady.
"There is little to tell," said Bero, in a quiet tone. "Her brother is
well known in Rome as an artist. He lives there with his sister and an
old duenna. She wears this mysterious veil constantly, and some fanciful
people see just as mysterious a cloud resting about her life. I only
know she is strange and beautiful, and that her name is Lillia."

Yet Bero had seen this woman almost daily for six months. But he only
knew she was strange and beautiful, and that her name was Lillia.

Mae had never spoken to the veiled stranger, yet if Bero had turned upon
her and asked, "Who is she?" she would have replied: "I do not know her
name or where she lives, but I know she struggles, and despairs, and
smiles over all. And I know her suffering comes from sorrow--not from
sin." But Mae did not say all this. She only looked at the veiled lady.
Her vestal lamp had dropped for the moment, and she seemed to be gazing
far away. A fold of her heavy veil fell over her brow quite down to her
great dark eyes. They were unshaded, yet they too, seemed clouded for
the moment. "Her name is Lillia," said Mae, reassuringly to herself.
"Her name is Lillia. I am sure she is like her name." Bero smiled. Just
then Lisetta appeared.



CHAPTER XII.


Early the next morning, in the misty light, Lisetta and Mae, the latter
still in her contadina costume, left the house quietly. In an hour the
train for Naples was to start, but Lisetta wanted to say her prayers in
Rome on this Ash Wednesday. They wandered into a little church, one of
the many Roman churches, and knelt side by side, Lisetta with her beads
and her penance, and Mae with her thoughts, which grew dreary enough
before the peasant was ready to go. Mae had already entrusted her money
to Lisetta's keeping--some one hundred and fifty dollars, which she
had gotten the day before from Albert to buy clothes with--and with her
money she had also resigned all care. She did not know therefore, until
the train started, that their seats were in a third-class carriage.
Every one was hurrying on board, so Mae was obliged to jump in without
a word, and accept her fate as best she could. It was no very pleasant
fate. The van was dirty, crowded, garlic-scented. Mae was plucky,
however, and knew she was to find dirt and dreadful odors everywhere.
Two months of Rome had taught her that. But it grew very dreadful in the
close travelling-carriage. There was an old woman at her side, with a
deformed hand, and two soldiers opposite, who stared rudely at her,
and made loud, unpleasant remarks; and having no books, and nothing to
entertain herself with, she was forced to curl up in a corner, and try
to sleep, which she could not do.

Poor child! it was a hard day. Dull and dreary outside, and within, the
sickening odors and people. Back in Rome, what were they doing? Had they
found out that she had gone? And Eric, how was he feeling? No, no, she
must not think of all this. It belonged to the past. Before her lay
Sorrento, the bay of Naples, oranges, white clouds, and the children of
the sun. Mamma was south, too--if she were only going to her. So the day
dragged on, until with the evening they reached Naples. They spent the
night with a friend of Lisetta, who rented apartments to English and
Americans. Mae was fortunate, therefore, in securing an unlet bedroom
that was comfortably furnished. She enjoyed listening to Lisetta's
stories of Rome and the Carnival; and after a quiet night in a clean
bed, awoke tolerably happy and very eager for her first sight of the
bay. They took an early train out to Castellamare, and as they left the
city, Mae wondered if Bero were just entering it. But she soon forgot
him and every one in the blue glories of the bay.

At Castellamare, Gaetano, Lisetta's husband, was awaiting them, with a
malicious little donkey, tricked out gaily enough in tags of color and
tinkling bells. It was very quaint and delightful to get into the funny,
low, rattling cart, and go jogging off, while the feminine sight-seers
fanned themselves in the windows of the ladies' waiting-room, and
grumbled, and the poor masculine travellers bartered in poor Italian,
with their certain-to-conquer enemies, those triumphant swindlers, the
drivers of the conveyances between Sorrento and Castellamare.

Then they began that wonderful ride along the coast. The horrors of
the day before rolled away like a mist as the donkey jogged along that
miraculous drive. Lisetta and Gaetano chattered together, and Mae sat
very still, with her face to the sea, drinking in all the glory, as she
had longed and planned. Hope revived in her breast, pride had stood by
her all the while, and here was glorious nature coming to her aid. She
was going swiftly to the orange groves and the children of the sun. She
should see Talila and brown babies and dancing, and at night a great,
yellow moon would light up the whole scene. So on and on they went,
the travelling carriages dashing by them now and then, with their three
donkeys abreast, and the driver cracking his whip, and the travellers
oh-ing and ah-ing.

"That is the most picturesque peasant I have yet seen," said a gentle
lady in brown to her husband, as they passed the humble little party.
"Yes, she is clean, and more like the ideal than the actual peasant, and
I am very glad I have seen her."

Really, Mae was for the moment, at a quick glance, the ideal peasant.
Her hands lay in her lap, her face was toward the sea, and her attitude
and features were all full of that glow of existence that peasant
portraits possess. She lived and moved and had her being as part of
a great, warm, live picture. If the lady in brown had not passed so
quickly, however, she would have seen a something in Mae's face that
spoiled her for a peasant, an earnestness in her admiration, a sharp
intensity in her joy, that was very different from the languid content
of a Southern Italian. Her movements were rather like those of the
Northern squirrel, which climbs nimbly and frisks briskly, than like the
sinuous, serpentine motions of the Southern creatures of the soil. We
are, after all, born where we belong, as a rule, and the rest of us soon
belong where we are born.

After a time the donkey pattered along towards a little patch of
houses on the shore. They had already passed a half dozen of similar
settlements. Very dirty children ran about crying, ugly, old women
knitted, mongrel dogs and cats barked and yelped and rolled in the mud.
Bits of orange-peel and old cabbage and other refuse food lay piled near
the doors. There were, to be sure, young girls with dark eyes, plaiting
straw, and the very dirt heaps had a picturesque sort of air. An artist
might linger a moment to look, but never to enter. Yet it was here that
Mae must enter. This was her new home. The neighbors came crowding about
curiously, and she was hurried into the little hut that seemed as if
it were carved roughly from some big garlic, probably by taking out the
heart of it for dinner. Mae hardly comprehended the situation at first,
but when she began to realize that this was a substitute for sea breeze,
and that the coarse clipped patois (which sounded worse in the mass
than when it fell from Lisetta's lips alone) was in place of the flowing
melody of speech she had longed for, she grew sick at heart. The folly,
the dreadfulness of what she had done, swept over her like a flood, and
with it came dreadful fear. She was helpless,--an outcast. Pride would
never let her go home. She could go nowhere else. They had her money,
and here she must live and die. She sat down in a sort of stupor, and
paid no heed to the squabbling children who pulled at her gown, or the
dogs who sniffed snappingly at the stranger.

Lisetta, busy with greetings and chattings, quite forgot her for a time,
and was dismayed when she saw her sitting disconsolately by. "Come,
Signorina," she cried, "go down to the bay. Here is Talila; she will
guide you."

Mae looked up quickly at that. Talila, was she here? A few feet from her
she saw an uncouth woman, with that falling of the jaw most imbeciles
possess, and a vacancy in her eyes. She had her hand raised and was
swearing at one of the children. "Talila," repeated Mae, rubbing her
eyes, and shivering, "but I thought Talila would be different. You said
she loved children, but this woman swears at them."

"O, dear, we all swear at them, but we love them; you shall see how they
follow her. Talila, off with you and your babies." And the next moment
there was a general scamper of brown children headed by this tall,
vacant-looking woman. "Take the lady to the sea," continued Lisetta. And
Mae arose, as if in a dream, and followed them.

The half-clad children of the sun ran before her as she had dreamed they
would; flowers sprang up along the way, but she did not stop to pluck a
single bud or turn to look at anything. She wandered on in an awful
sort of fright and came at length to the water's edge. Here there
were row-boats lying at anchor, into which the children clambered. Mae
stepped into one of them and sat down in the stern, and looked about.
All was as she had planned. Her day of heaven was here. She tried to be
brave. O, she tried very hard. She wanted to love and enjoy the sea, and
think beautiful thoughts. She roused a little and stretched herself out
to catch the sunbeams in her eyes, as she had said she would. How warm
they were. An umbrella would be a luxury--and a book! But these belonged
to the world she had left so far behind her. The dirty children babbled
a strange tongue; the water around the boat, by the shore, was covered
with a scum, and alas! alas! the land of her desire was farther off than
ever. Then she remembered that Norman Mann had once said: "If you ever
do disappear I shall know where to look for you." Would he think of it
now? Would he come for her? If he had only come last night, and would
drive by now to Sorrento. He would be here soon if he had. Would she
call him loudly or shrink down in the boat and hide her face in her
hands till she knew he was a long way past? The rest of them would not
know where to look for her. They did not know anything about Lisetta,
and she had promised not to tell even the padrona. (Faithless Lisetta!)
But of course Norman wouldn't come for her, after what he had said at
the Capitol. That was what finally drove her away. How unlike him it did
seem to speak of her in that way to Eric. She thought over his words,
and as she did so she seemed to see her mistake, and grasp his meaning.

She sprang up in the boat. "It was the other girl--Miss Rae--he was
speaking of. Oh, oh, oh--and now it is too late. He will hate me
always."

As she stood there, a carriage rolled by. Some one looked out. "O,
mamma," said a young voice in English, "look at that pretty little
peasant," and a kid-gloved hand was stretched through the open window to
spatter a shower of base coin toward her. It was terrible! The children
sprang for it, and, fighting and laughing, ran homewards with the
dreadful Talila. The parti-colored picturesque dress had been a joy to
Mae. Now she longed to tear it off and die--die! No, she was afraid to
die. She would have to live, and she didn't know how, and she laughed a
bitter sort of laugh.

There was a sound of horses' feet again. The road lay almost close to
the shore just here. A low exclamation, a vault from his horse, which
was speedily cared for by a dozen boys near at hand, and before Mae knew
it, the officer was beside her once more.

O, how beautiful it was to see some one from the world, fresh, and
clean, and fair. Mae gazed at him in delight, and sprang up warmly,
holding out both her hot hands, "How is Heaven?" asked Bero, as he
raised the white fingers to his lips.

"That is not the custom with us," said Mae, withdrawing her hand.

"But what is custom in Heaven?" he laughed. "Can't we do as we please in
our Heaven, Signorina?"

"This isn't our Heaven, and I don't please. O, how could you let me come
to this dreadful place. Did you know how awful it would be?"

"Shall I tell you why I said nothing? Let me row you away from all
this," and he began to untie the boat.

"When did you come?" asked Mae,

"I left Rome last night, reached Naples this morning, and here I am as
soon as possible, Signorina."

Mae felt herself gradually yielding to the spell of this man's soft
power. She had grown strangely quiet and passive, and she folded her
hands and looked off seawards in a not unhappy way. She seemed to be
some one else in a strange dream.

"Are you glad I came?" asked Bero, as he jumped into the boat and sat
down opposite her. Mae did not reply. She had almost lost the power of
speech. She only smiled feebly and faintly. Bero had never seen her thus
before, but he realized dimly that it was he who had changed her, and
the sense of his own power excited him the more. He bent his proud head
and flashed his beautiful eyes as he lifted the oars to the locks, and
silently pulled out toward the bay.

As he rowed he gazed fixedly at her, and the frightened, puzzled child
could not turn her eyes from his. His look grew softer and tenderer,
his head bent towards her, the oars moved slower and slower and at last
stopped imperceptibly. Still the man gazed passionately, claimingly, and
the girl breathed harder and let her eyes rest on his, as if he had been
a wondrous, charming serpent, and she a little, unresisting dove. Then
he spoke.

His words were so low, it seemed as if his eyes had found voice; his
words were so caressing, it seemed as if they changed to kisses as they
fell. "Listen," he said, softly, and drew up his dripping oars and let
the boat drift--"Listen. This is not our Heaven, but I know a villa by
the sea. There are hills and woods about it; flowers, fruits, and in
the day, sunshine, at night, moonlight and music; drives, and walks, and
vines, and arbors. Could you find there your Heaven--with me? May I take
you to my villa?"

When he ceased, his words dropped slowly into silence, and Mae still
gazed at him. She saw him come nearer to her, with his eyes fixed on
hers; she saw his hand leave the oar and move slowly toward hers,
but she was motionless, looking at the picture he had painted her of
life--the cloudless days, moonlit nights--the villa by the sea--the
glowing Piedmontese. Her eyelids trembled, her pulse beat.

Could she take that villa for her home? That man for her husband? She
had half thought till now in soft luxurious Italian, but 'my home' and
'my husband' said themselves to her in her own mother tongue. She gave
a long shiver, and pulled her eyes from his. It was like waking from
a dream. "No--oh, no; take me home," she gasped, and turned toward the
shore, where, erect, with folded arms and head bared, stood Norman Mann.

The Italian bit his lip, and said something under his breath, but he
took the oars and pulled ashore. Mae turned her eyes downward and felt
the color creep up, up into her cheeks. It seemed eternity. The boat
was Charon's, and she was drifting to her fate. Norman Mann stood like a
statue. The wind moved his hair over his forehead, and once Mae saw him
toss the unruly locks back in a familiar way he had. She did not know
why, but the tears half came to her eyes as he did it. He stood as
firm and hard and still as a New England rock, while the Italian swayed
lithely as he pulled the oars, with the curve and motion of a sliding,
slippery stream.

The boat came safely ashore. The Piedmontese helped her to land, and the
three stood silent; but Mae under all her shame felt content to be near
Norman. His voice broke the quiet, quick and clear. "Are you married?"
he asked.

"I! married! What do you--what can he mean?"

"Why is this man here, then?"

Mae stood an instant so still that the heavy breaths of the two men were
distinctly audible, the passionate boundings of Bero's pulse, the long,
deep throbs of Norman's heart. The officer stepped toward her. Norman
stood unmoved. The Italian's eye wandered restlessly, his hand fell to
his sword. Norman's arms were folded, and his face set.

Mae looked at one, then at the other, perplexedly. Then she understood.
Like lightning, a terrible temptation flashed into her mind. The Italian
loved her, would shield, protect, honor her. Norman must hate her, would
always despise her. Should she lift her little weak woman's hand and
place it in the man's hand ready to claim it, or stand still and be
crushed by that other hand there?

Ah! she could not do it. She tried once. She held out weakly her right
hand toward Bero; but the left stretched itself involuntarily to Norman.
Then the two met in each other's pitiful clasp over her bent head, and
with a low wailing cry she fell in a little heap on the sand.

When she opened her eyes, they were both bending over her. "Take me
home," she gasped to Norman. He glared at the officer. "Go!" he said.
Bero put his hand to his sword. Mae sprang up. "No," she said, gently,
"no, my friend, for you have always been kind and friendly to me. Pray
go." Bero was touched by this. This little girl had taken only good from
him, after all, sympathy and friendliness. Norman was touched also with
the same thought. Then the officer smiled pleasantly. He shrugged his
shoulders slightly, regretfully, and bowed and rode away. And so the
clinking spurs and yellow moustaches and amorous eyes vanished from
Mae's sight.

As he rode off he was somewhat sorrowful; but he took a picture from his
pocket and looked at it. "She'll be glad to welcome me back again,"
he said to himself, pleasantly, "and she belongs to my own land. This
little foreigner might have pined for her own home, by and by." Then he
sighed and shook his head. "Alas! this little stranger will dance before
you often, still!" and he touched his eyes; "but I will put you back
in your place here, now." This he said, looking at Lillia's picture and
with his hand on his heart.



CHAPTER XIII.


"Take me home," said Mae again imploringly. "Not back there," as Norman
drew her hand through his arm and started for the hut, "O no, not even
for a minute."

"Sit here then," he replied quietly, "while I arrange it with the
woman," and he walked quickly away. Mae watched him till he entered the
low doorway, in a sort of subdued, glorified happiness, that would break
out over her shame and fear. She was afraid he would hate her, at least
she told herself so, but in reality, everything and everybody and every
place were fast fading out of this eager little mind. She and Norman
were together, and she could not help being content. There was a certain
joy in her weakness and shame, though they were genuine and kept her
hushed and silent.

Poor Lisetta was very much frightened, but told her story to this angry
stranger with true Southern palaver. She said the little lady loved
Italy so, and wanted to be a peasant, and insisted she would run away
quite by herself if Lisetta would not take her, and so she consented,
knowing she could, through the padrona, send word to the friends.

"And the man?" asked Norman, impatiently.

"What man? O, the officer. He just rode down this morning for a morning
call. I never saw him before."

A great weight, as large as the Piedmontese, fell from Norman's heart
then, and he scattered money among the children recklessly and ordered
up the donkey; and smiled on the amazed Lisetta all in the same breath,
and went back to help Mae into the wagon with the lightest kind of a
heart. It was a strange ride they took back to Castellamare. I think
they both wished the world could stand still once more. When they had
arrived at the station they found the next train to Naples was not due
for two hours. Norman left Mae in the waiting-room for a time. Through
the window she watched Gaetano and the donkey start homeward, with a
great sigh of relief. She had time while she was sitting to think, but
her head was in too great a whirl. She could only feel sorry and ashamed
and meek and happy, all mixed together. The sensation was odd.

"I have telegraphed Eric that we would start home by the next train,
that you had only been off for a frolic. I hope we can buy a waterproof
or shawl and a hat in Naples for you?"

"Yes," said Mae, meekly, "I have my waterproof here. I think I will put
it on now, please," and she began nervously to untie the shawl strap.
Norman put her fingers gently aside, and unbuckled it for her. He handed
her the long deep-blue cloak, which she put tightly about her, drawing
the hood over her head. "You look like a nun," said Norman, smiling.
"I wish I were one," replied Mae, with a choke in her throat. She was
growing very penitential and softened.

"What shall we do now?" asked Mr. Mann. "We have a long time to wait. If
you feel like walking, we can find a pleasanter spot than this."

"Go anywhere you please," replied Mae meekly. "What is the matter with
you?"--for Norman had a very amused expression in his brown eyes.

"I hardly recognize you. Not a trace of fight so far, and it must be two
hours since we met."

"Don't," said Mae, with her eyes down, so of course he didn't, but the
two just marched quietly along back on the Sorrento road towards some
high rocks. They sat down behind these, with their faces towards the
sea, and were as thoroughly hidden from view, as if they had been quite
alone in the world.

"I suppose they were frightened," asked Mae, "at home--at Rome, I mean."
"Dreadfully," replied Norman, trying to be sober, but with the glad ring
in his voice still. "Edith was for dragging the Tiber; she was sure
you and the seven-branched candlestick lay side by side. Mrs. Jerrold
searched your trunks and read all your private papers, I am morally
certain." Then Norman stopped abruptly, and Mae drew the long stiletto
from her hair nervously and played with it before she said, "And the
boys?" "Albert was very, very sad, but reasonably sure you would be
found. We all feared the Italian, but Albert worked carefully, and soon
discovered that the officer was said to be engaged to a young girl
with whom he had been seen the day after you left, and that gave him
courage,"--then Norman stopped again abruptly. "And Eric?" "Eric sat
down with his face in his hands and cried, Miss Mae, and said, 'I've
lost my sister, the very dearest little sister in the world.'"

"And you came and found me," said Mae, after a pause, wiping the tears
from her eyes. "Yes, thank God," said Norman. He was sober enough now.
"Why did you do it?" asked Mae, "when I had been so naughty, and silly,
and unkind?" He came very near telling her the reason as she looked up
at him, but he did not, for she dashed on, "O! Mr. Mann, I have been--"

"Don't confess to me, Miss Mae. Leave all of this till you get home to
your own, who have a right to your confessions and penitence. Never
mind what you have been, here you are, and as I have only one more
handkerchief and your own looks as if it had been sea-bathing, you had
better dry your eyes and be jolly for the next two hours." This was
a precarious speech, but Mae only laughed at it, and dried her eyes
quickly. "But I have one thing to say to you," she said, "and please
mayn't I?"

"You may say anything you please to me, of course," replied this very
magnanimous Norman.

"It is not about the miserable past or my doings, but it's about the
future. I've said good-bye to my dreams of life--the floating and waving
and singing and dancing life that was like iced champagne. I'd rather
have cold water, thank you, sir, for a steady drink, morning, noon and
night. I'm going to be good, to read and study and grow restful,"--and
Mae folded her hands and looked off toward the sea. "She's a witching
child," thought Norman. Then she raised her head. "I said it lightly
because I felt it deeply," she added, as if in reply to his thought. "I
am going to grow, if I can, unselfish and sympathetic, and perhaps, who
knows, wise, and any way good."

"There is no need of giving up your champagne entirely. Give yourself
a dinner party now and then o' holidays. The world is full of color and
beauty, and poetry you love. All study is full of it--most of all it
lives in humanity."

"Well," said Mae, "aren't you glad I'm going to change so?"

"I'm glad you're going to give your soul a chance. Your body has been
putting it down hard of late."

"It's but a weakling," said Mae, with a shake of her head, "and I've
hardly heard its whimpers at all, but--O, Mr. Mann, if you could have
seen Talila--she's dreadful."

"Who is Talila? and what has she to do with your soul?"

"O, she's one of those Sorrento people," replied Mae, as if she had
lived there for years. "I have so much to tell you: it will take--"

"Years, I hope, dear." The last word dropped without his noticing it,
but Mae caught it and hid it in her heart.

"What made you think of coming for me?" she asked, after a pause, during
which Norman had hummed a song as she had been writing her name on the
sand. They were quite on the shore and only a narrow stretch of beach
separated them from the bay. "You said if you ever came away, you would
go to Sorrento, and I knew you had a friend in the kitchen who lived
near Naples. So I searched for her and the padrona, and, finding neither
of them, set Giovanni a babbling, and learned that the woman Lisetta had
left that morning for Sorrento. I told the boys I had a mere suspicion
that I would trace for them. So off I came last night, and by stopping
and enquiring at every settlement, at last discovered you."

"This is my birth-day; I am twenty years old," said Mae, "Why, what are
you doing?" For Norman had bent down to the sand also, and had drawn a
queer little figure there.

"That is you when you were one year old," he laughed, "and you could
only crow and kick your small feet, and smile now and then, and cry the
rest of the time."

"That is about all I can do yet," said Mae.

"Here comes number two," and he drew his hand across the sand and
smoothed the baby image away, leaving in its place a round, sturdy
little creature, poised dangerously on one foot. "You have walked alone,
and you have called your father's name, and you're a wonderful child by
this time."

"This is the three-year-old, white aprons and curls, please observe.
Now, you recite 'Dickery, dickery dock' and 'I want to be an angel,' and
you have cut all your wisdom teeth."

"O, Mr. Mann, I haven't cut them yet. Babies don't have them."

"Don't they? Well, you have other teeth in their place, white and
sharp--but by this time you are four years old."

"Ah, here I begin to remember. You draw the pictures, and I'll describe
myself. Four years old!--let me see--I had a sled for Christmas, and I
used to eat green apples. That's all I can remember; and five and six
years old were just the same."

"O, no, I'm sure you went to church for the first time somewhere along
there; and isn't that a noteworthy event? I suppose all your thoughts
were of your button boots and your new parasol?"

"I behaved beautifully, I know; mamma says so; sat up like a lady, while
you were sleeping, on that very same Sunday, off in some little country
church, I suppose."

"I shouldn't wonder--sleeping in my brother's outgrown coat into the
bargain, with the sleeves dangling over my little brown hands."

"It doesn't seem as if they could ever have been very little, does it,
Mr. Mann?"

Mr. Mann unfolded five fingers and a thumb and surveyed them gravely for
a moment. "It is strange that this once measured three inches by two and
couldn't hit out any better than your's could."

Mae had laid her hand on her knee and was looking at it also in the
most serious manner. Now she doubled it into a small but very pugnacious
looking fist, which she shook most entrancingly before the very eyes of
the young man by her side. The eyes turned such a peculiar look upon
her that she hastened to add: "Go on with your dissolving views. It
is number eight's turn next. You are the showman, and I am interested
spectator."

"You insist upon describing my pictures, so I think you are properly
first assistant to the grand panorama. Here's eight-year-old. Try your
powers on her."

"Let me see. O, then I read all the while, the 'Fairchild Family'
and 'Anna Ross,' and I used to wear my hair in very smooth braids, I
remember. I was ever so good."

"Impossible; you must have forgotten," suggested Norman. "You surely
whispered in school and committed similar dreadful crimes. Poor little
prig."

"No, don't," plead Mae; "please don't laugh at the little girl me. I
love to think of her as so goody-goody. Last night," and Mae lowered
her voice, "I seemed to see little Mae Madden kneeling down in the old
nursery in her woolly wrapper saying her prayers," and Mae brought up
on the prayers very abruptly, and bent over toward the sand and began
to draw hastily. "Here comes nine-year-old Mae. Mr. Mann, you may do the
describing."

"O, I suppose there were doll's parties, first valentines, and rides
with Albert in his buggy, when you clung very tightly to the slight arm
of the carriage and smiled very bravely up in his face. You must have
been pretty then."

"No, I was dreadfully ugly. I had broken out two teeth climbing a stone
wall."

"You had stopped being good?"

"Yes, that only lasted a little bit of a time."

"Miss Mae, I'm sure you were never ugly, but naughty and silly, I dare
say. Kept a diary now, didn't you?"

"Yes, and went to sleep with Eliza Cooke's poems under my pillow every
night, and my finger holding the book open at some such thrilling verse
as this:

         'Say on that I'm over romantic
           In loving the wild and the free,
          But the waves of the dashing Atlantic,
           The Alps and the eagle for me.'"

"Did you wear your hair plaited when you were ten years old?" enquired
Norman, intensely busy with another drawing.

"O no; I didn't do anything when I was ten years old but get mad and
make up with my two dearest friends."

"One of whom was your dearest friend one-half of the time and the other
the rest of it, I suppose."

"Don't be satirical, sir. I had a lover when I was eleven; I used to
skate with him and write him little notes, folded very queerly."

"Why do you draw twelve and thirteen with their heads down?" asked Mae,
after a moment.

"Because they read so much; everything they can get hold of, including,
possibly, a very revised edition of 'Arabian Nights'?"

"Yes," laughed Mae, "and my first novel, 'Villette.'"

"You go to a play for the first time now," suggested Norman. "How you
clasp your hands and wink your eyes and bite your lips! And next day, in
front of your mother's pier-glass, how you scream 'O, my love,' and gasp
and tumble over in a heap in your brown calico, as the grand lady did
the night before, in her pink silk."

"Brown calico, indeed! I never condescended to die in my own clothes,
let me assure you. The garret was overhauled, and had been since I was
a mere baby, for effective, sweeping garments. Let us hurry along over
fourteen and fifteen. I was sentimental and tried to be so young-ladyish
then. I used to read history with Albert, and always put on both my
gloves when I started out, and had great horror of girls who talked
loud in the street. I learned to make bread, and shirt bosoms, and such
things."

"Well, here you are in a long dress, Miss Sweet Sixteen. I remember you
home from boarding school on a vacation."

"What did you think of me?" asked Mae, "didn't we have a nice time that
summer? O, how silly I was!"

She hurried on, because the eyes had given her that peculiar look
again, which put her heart in a tremble. "I did have a beautiful time
at boarding school," she continued, "the darlingest principal and such
girls."

"Then I suppose you wrote a salutatory in forlorn rhyme to end off
with," laughed Norman, "and read it, all arrayed in white, in a
trembling voice, and everybody applauded, and even old Judge Seymour
admired it, while you were reading, with your pink cheeks and trembling
hands and quivering voice."

"Abominable! I didn't have the salutatory, and the girl who did, read a
superb one, as strong and masculine--"

"Then the Judge went to sleep, I'm sure," declared Norman.

"Well," said Mae, "you are leaving out two years," for Norman had leaned
back against the rock with his arms folded.

"By and by," said Norman, "we all come off to Europe, and some of us go
through the heart-ache, don't we?"

"Yes," replied Mae, softly.

"But come out ahead one day at Sorrento, perhaps?" asked Norman. To
which Mae made no direct reply.

"All the Mae Maddens have faded away," she said, looking down at the
sand again. "The tide is rising." And she walked forward to the ripples
of water, and then came slowly back and stood before Norman seriously.
He laughed.

"Why, Mr. Mann," said Mae, "I have been so very, very wicked."

The dreadful Mr. Mann only laughed again.

"You act as if it were all a joke. I never saw you so merry before."

"I have never been as happy before in my life."

"Why?" asked Mae, in a low voice.

"Because I have found you," he answered earnestly, and before she knew
it Mae was lifted in the strong, manly arms, her pink cheek close to
Norman's brown one, and his lips on hers. She leaned her face against
his and clung tightly to him,

"O, Mr. Norman Mann," she said, "do you really want me as much--as I do
you?"

And Norman, still holding her tightly, bent his hand, with hers clasped
in it, to the sand, and after the Mae Madden, he wrote another name, so
that it read:


MAE MADDEN MANN.


Then he said a great many, many things, all beginning with that
electric, wonderful little possessive pronoun "my," of which he had
discoursed formerly, and he held her close all the while, and they
missed the next train for Naples.

The gay peasant costume fell about the girl's round lithe form like the
luxuriant skin of some richly marked animal; but out of her eyes looked
a woman's tender, loving, earnest soul. Norman Mann had saved her.



CHAPTER XIV.


Edith was quietly married to Albert at Easter time, in the English
Chapel at Florence. The event was hastened by the sudden appearance of
Mae's parents, who set sail soon after hearing of the Sorrento escapade
and the embryonic engagement, which awaited their sanction before being
announced. Everything was beautifully smooth at last. Edith and Albert
left the day of their marriage for Munich, and later, Mrs. Jerrold was
to settle down with them at Tuebingen. The rest of the party were to
summer in Switzerland; then came fall, and then--what?

Norman thought he knew, and Mae said she thought he didn't, but this
young woman was losing half her character for willfulness, and Norman
was growing into a perfect tyrant, so far as his rights were concerned.
Easter is a season of marriages. Mae read in a Roman paper the betrothal
announcement of the Signor Bero and Signorina Lillia Taria. "I would
like to send them a real beautiful present," said she, and Norman did
not say no. So these two hunted all over Florence, and at length, in
the studio of a certain not unknown Florentine, they discovered the very
gift Mae desired--a picture of a young Italian soldier, bringing home
his bride to his own people. There was the aged mother, proud and happy,
waiting to bid the dark-eyed girl welcome. "She has a real 'old Nokomis'
air," laughed Mae. "I know she would have told her son not to seek 'a
stranger whom he knew not.'" The distant olive-colored hillsides, the
splashing fountain near at hand, each face, and even the thick strong
sunshine seemed to bear a tiny stamp with Italy graven on it. "The name
of the picture is exactly right," said Mae. Under the painting were
these words: "Italia Our Home."

Norman would hardly have been human if he had not cast a quick glance at
her as she stood thoughtfully before the picture. Mae was almost as good
as an Italian for involuntary posing. She had made a tableau of herself
now, with one hand at her eyes to shade them from the glare of the sun
that fell fiercely through the window, her head half on one side, and a
bit of drapery, of lace or soft silk, tight around her white throat. She
felt Norman's glance, and looked up quickly, and smiled and shook her
head: "No, Italy is not my home, although I love it so well. There is
a certain wide old doorway not many miles from New York, and the hills
around it, and the great river before it, and the people in it, all
belong together, too. That's where we belong, Norman, in America,
our home," and Mae struck a grand final pose with her hands clasped
ecstatically, and her eyes flashing in the true Goddess of Liberty
style.

"Yes, I believe we do, Mae; I am almost anxious to get back and begin
work in that young, eager country."

"And so am I," said Mae.

Norman laughed. "To think of your coming down to work, you young
butterfly."

"It is what we all have to come to, isn't it?--unless we go to that
creature that finds some mischief still for idle hands to do. I don't
expect to come to stone-cutting or cattle-driving, but I do expect to
settle down into a tolerable housewifely little woman, and--"

"And look after me."

"Yes, I suppose so--and myself, and probably a sewing-class and
the cook's lame son. Heigh-ho-hum! What a pity it is, that it is so
uninteresting to be good."

"How do you know?"

"Don't be saucy. I do know, perfectly well, that Mae Madden, naughty,
idle, and silly, may be, after all, not so stupid; but get me good,
industrious and wise, and it will take all of my time when I'm not
asleep to keep so. No, there'll be nothing to say about me any more.
I'll be as humdrum as--"

"As I am."

"You--why Norman, are you humdrum?"

"Of course I am, dreadfully humdrum. If you and I were in a story-book,
you would have ten pages to my one, to keep the reader awake. But then,
story-books aren't the end of life. Suppose you, Mae Madden, have been
odd, full of variety, ready to twist common occurrences into something
startling and romantic, have you been happy? Haven't you been restless
and discontented? Now, can't you, grown humdrum and good, be very happy
and contented and joyful, even if the sun rises on just about the same
Mondays and Tuesdays and Wednesdays, the year round? You will not do for
a story-book then, but won't you do better for life? And, after all,
a lively murderer is a great deal more sensational than you could ever
be."

"Even when I ran away?"

"Yes. Now, you see, I have been humdrum again, and half preached a
sermon."

"All right, sir; so long as you take me for a text, you may preach as
you want to, and by and by, I dare say, I shall agree with you."

"It would have been a great deal more interesting if you had married
that Italian."

"How do you know I could have married that Italian, my lord? He is going
to marry a girl as much more beautiful than I am as--as Bero himself is
than you--and yet I would rather have you. And now, don't you dare look
at me in that way. I'll never say another nice thing to you if you do.
This artist will think we are--"

"Lovers, my dear. And aren't we?"

* * * * *


Ten days later Norman entered with a letter for Mae. "Read it to
me," she said, throwing back the blinds and leaning her elbows on the
window-cushion.

"It is from Lillia. Would you rather read it yourself?" "O, no." So
Norman read what Lillia had written in her pretty broken English:


"My DEAR MISS MAE:--Thank you of all my heart for your so lovely gift.
I have had so little home since long, long ago my mother died, and now
I am to have one as the maid in the picture has. We will marry the fifth
day of May at five o'clock, and will wish you to be there. Don't forget
me.

"LILLIA."


"Signor Bero has added a postscript, Mae, which you can translate better
than I." And Norman handed her the letter. Mae translated it thus:


"Did you know all that the picture would say to me, Signorina? Receive
my thanks for it, too, and believe I shall always live worthy of my
Italy, my wife and friends that I see in the picture, and of another
friend who lives so far away, whom I shall never see again, if I have
such a friend. Think of my beautiful Lillia on our wedding day. We shall
be married at St. Andrea's, at vesper time.

"Bero."


"And this is the day," said Mae, dropping the note.

"And the very hour, allowing the bride and the sun a few minutes each,"
added Norman, glancing at the clock.

They gaze quietly out of the window of their lodgings on the Borgo
Ognissante, but Mae sees far away beyond the Arno, into the church of
St. Andrea,--music, and pomp, and beautiful ceremony, and before the
altar, a woman in her bridal robes, with heavily figured lace falling
over her black hair and white forehead, and against her soft cheeks and
shoulders. Her great brown eyes have thrown away the mist of sadness
for a luminous wedding veil of joy, and she is Lillia, and by her side,
erect, proud, glorious, with a lingering ray of light falling on his
golden head, is her happy husband, Bero. They stand before the altar
of St. Andrea's. "God bless you," says Mae aloud. Then her gaze wanders
back to the coral and mosaic shops below in the street, and up across to
the opposite window, where a long-haired, brown-moustached, brown-eyed
man leans, puffing smoke from his curved lips, and holding his cigarette
in his slender fingers. She meets his gaze now, as she has met it
before. "He is wondering what life will bring to these two young people,
I fancy," says Mae.

"Our own wedding-day, Mae," Norman replies; and they both forget all
about Lillia, and Bero, and the stranger, and suddenly leave the window.
The long-haired man puffs his cigar in a little loneliness, and wishes
that wedding bells might ring for his empty heart too.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mae Madden, by Mary Murdoch Mason

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAE MADDEN ***

***** This file should be named 1829.txt or 1829.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/8/2/1829/

Produced by Donald Lainson

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
